 
District of Columbia 


 

 
Department of Employment Services 
 
 


 
 
  
GOVERNMENT OF THE      DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA                     MURIEL BOWSER, MAYOR 
UNIQUE MORRIS-HUGHES, DIRECTOR 
 
 

Workforce Innovation & Opportunity Act 

Program Year 2017 
Annual Performance Report 





Contents 
TABLE OF CONTENTS                                                                                                              2 
SECTION I: DISTRICT’S WORKFORCE VISION                                                                 3 
SECTION II: DISTRICT’s WORKFORCE GOALS                                                                  3 
SECTION III: SECTOR STRATEGIES/ CAREER PATHWAYS                                         6 
SECTION IV: CUSTOMER SATISFACTION                                                                             7 
A.1- American Job Centers                                                                                                     7 
A.2- Ask the Director                                                                                                                8 
A.3-Grade.DC.Gov                                                                                                                     8 
A.4-Daily Dispatch/The Oracle                                                                                             8 
A.5-Customer Service Bill of Rights                                                                                     8 
SECTION V: PERFORMANCE ACCOUNTABILITY                                                             9 
A.1- Adult Program                                                                                                                  9 
A.2- Dislocated Worker Program                                                                                         10 
A.3-Youth Program                                                                                                                11 
A.4- Wagner-Peyser Program                                                                                             12 
A.5- Effectiveness in Serving Employers                                                                         12 
A.6- Common Exit Policy                                                                                                       13 
SECTION VI: EVALUATION ACTIVITIES                                                                          13 
SECTION VII: OTHER ACTIVITIES AND PROGRAMS                                                    15 
A.1- Rapid Response Program                                                                                             15 
A.2- Veterans Services                                                                                                             16 
SECTION VIII: PROMISING PRACTICES/SUCCESS STORIES                                      16 
A.1- Promising Practices                                                                                                        17 
A.2- Success Stories                                                                                                                   19 
SECTION IX: WAIVERS                                                                                                                               21 
   
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION I: DISTRICT’S WORKFORCE VISION 
The District’s proposed WIOA plan served as the PY2017 roadmap as we worked to transform our workforce development system. The vision, goals, strategies and plans outlined in the Unified State Plan will move the District from a set of siloed workforce programs, across multiple agencies, to a coordinated, accessible and effective workforce system wherein residents can easily access an array of high-quality services offered through various departments through seamless service delivery. 
 
The District’s vision is that “Every Washington, DC resident is ready, able, and empowered to discover and attain their fullest potential through lifelong learning, sustained employment, and economic security. Businesses are connected to the skilled District residents they need to compete globally, are full participants in the workforce system, and drive the District’s economic growth. Residents and businesses in all wards are supported by coordinated, cohesive, and integrated government agencies and partners working to help communities thrive.” 
 
SECTION II: DISTICT’S WORKFORCE GOALS 
GOAL #1- System Alignment: District agencies form an integrated workforce system that delivers coordinated, accessible, and effective workforce services through clearly defined roles and transitional supports throughout the provision of a continuum of services. 
 
In order for our workforce system to progress and continue to serve all District residents, all partner agencies need to be aligned in their procedural and operational functions. While delineating clear roles and responsibilities, this will provide the opportunity to eliminate inefficient processes and improve customer service to both jobseekers and businesses. In recent focus groups and interviews with area employers and system users, several points were raised on how the current overlap among services and programming offerings complicates the utilization of the system. 
 
Increased integration with clearly defined roles and transitional supports will provide a more seamless delivery structure for system users and help allocate resources more efficiently to increase overall offerings. 
 
Goal Progress: In Program Year 2017, the DC Workforce Investment Council (WIC) worked collaboratively with the One Stop Operator to increase outreach & marketing for the American Jobs Centers (AJCs), and worked collaboratively with partner agencies to increase and streamline access to shared services.  The WIC also implemented the Data Vault Working Group to support the shared intake, assessment, and referral of customers by advancing MOUs and cross training partner agency staff. 
 
In the Fall of 2017, the DC WIC established a Community of Practice (CoP) to provide resources and technical assistance for the DC workforce system partners to support the implementation of career pathways and sector strategies. 
 
GOAL #2- Access to Workforce and Education Services: All residents, including people with disabilities and those with multiple barriers to employment, regardless of education or skill level, can access the education, training, career, and supportive services necessary to move forward in their career pathway. 
 
While a large segment of the District’s population possesses bachelors and advanced degrees, we also have a large population without a high school diploma or its equivalent and significant numbers of individuals with one or more barriers to employment. Customer challenges in accessing and moving between the numerous services needed for some individuals to advance towards self-sufficiency have been cited, and an effective system must be flexible in addressing varying needs. Increasing access to the full range of services and supports, as well as connections and handoff processes between services, will ensure that there are career pathways and options for individuals regardless of their educational attainment and skill levels. 
 
Goal Progress: In Program Year 2017, the DC Workforce Investment Council (WIC) and the DC Office of the State Superintendent of Education (OSSE), through the Adult Education and Family Literacy Act (AEFLA) grant, partnered to create career pathway opportunities for District residents. Through a braided funding model, the WIC and OSSE awarded funding to 10 sub-grantees to offer integrated and contextualized education services in alignment with the WIC’s high-demand sectors, for District residents. The WIC used the FY17 Innovation Fund to launch this competitive grant that will support District residents with high-barriers to employment, including low levels of literacy and basic skills. The District also increased access to Occupational Skills Training, On the Job Training (OJT), Apprenticeships and other work-based learning opportunities through Apprenticeship DC, and the launch of the DC Infrastructure Academy. 
 
GOAL #3- Sector Strategies/Alignment with Business Needs: The District’s business community gains access to a broader pool of District talent with the skills necessary to meet their needs and advance within their organizations; and informs workforce investments and incentives that effectively match jobseekers with their needs. 
 
Businesses have frequently cited challenges in identifying enough District residents to meet both their skill set requirements and job readiness criteria, which can lead to both reduced business competitiveness and challenges for residents in competing with talent from neighboring jurisdictions. These stakeholders have cited the need to increase their role in informing and delivering training and other services, as well as aligning services targeted within high-demand sectors with significant hiring needs. Increasing the role of business leaders in the workforce system and creating true sector strategies that align with career pathways in high-demand sectors can help ensure that the District’s workforce system adds value for employers. 
 
Goal Progress: In PY 2017, the DC WIC increased alignment between adult education and local business employment needs by basing program offerings on Labor Market Information (LMI) and supporting collaborative partnerships between employment and training providers and employers.  The WIC, with its business led Board, also used labor 
market information to define the District’s six target sectors (construction, healthcare, hospitality, information technology and business administration, Infrastructure and   
transportation, and security and law).  This effort has helped to focus efforts to develop career pathways and sector strategies, as well as overall employer engagement efforts.   
 
Additionally, in the Spring of 2018, three representatives of the District business community were added to the DC Adult Career Pathways Task Force, which represent the WIC’s high-demand sectors to ensure consistent preparation of DC residents for the workforce.  The DC Adult Career Pathways Task Force established employer-led career pathway and sector strategy working groups in information technology and business administration, infrastructure and transportation, and security and law enforcement. The DC WIC conducted outreach with industry partners and held an employer leader kickoff meeting to raise awareness and garner champions for the effort in June of 2018. Working group activities have continued into program year 2018. 
 
GOAL #4- Performance and Accountability: Funded workforce services are evidence-based, high quality, and flexible in meeting individuals’ needs; and District agencies evaluate outcomes through standardized methodologies that ensures accountability and transparency.  
 
Evidence based services with high-level accountability and transparency are key to a sustainable and demand-driven workforce system. Accurate and timely assessment of programs has been lacking in many areas, and differences in reporting requirements and structures have increased these challenges. Through Mayor Bowser’s CapStat initiative, the District will assess its workforce system more thoroughly to help increase high-quality program offerings and move away from less effective services and providers. Greater standardization in defining and tracking outcomes will help the District better serve our jobseekers and business stakeholders. The process for determining the additional outcomes that will be tracked across providers will be informed by an 
engagement process with stakeholders and subject matter experts. 
 
Goal Progress:  The WIC more than Tripled the Eligible Training Provider List (ETPL) in PY17. The WIC revised ETPL Policy to incorporate a new, more streamlined ETPL application process that improves efficiency and helps to ensure the overall quality of training services offered to District residents.   Additionally, the Data Vault Working Group made substantial progress in facilitating the interface of the Management Information Systems across the core programs.  The working group meets monthly and worked on topics such as universal referral form, integrated orientation, and establishment of the data elements that will be shared across program data systems. 
 
GOAL #5- Youth: Youth have access to a coordinated, accessible, education and workforce system that provides the supports needed to prepare them for postsecondary success; including education, training, and competitive employment. 
 
A critical component of improving of the District’s larger workforce development strategy includes the reshaping and integration of youth workforce development. Youth suffer from higher rates of unemployment and disconnection from the workforce than other 
age groups, and also have unique developmental needs, which necessitate targeted services that both supplement and complement other workforce offerings. In order to create a more coordinated system of services and ensure that the District’s youth employment programs address previous compliance challenges, coordinated and accessible services must be provided across workforce system partners. 
 
Goal Progress: The DC Workforce Investment Council (WIC) and the DC Office of the State Superintendent of Education (OSSE), through the Adult Education and Family Literacy Act (AEFLA) grant, partnered to create career pathway opportunities for District residents. Through a braided funding model, the WIC and OSSE awarded funding to 10 sub-grantees to offer integrated and contextualized education services in alignment with the WIC’s high-demand sectors, for District residents. 
 
SECTION III: SECTOR STRATEGIES/CAREER PATHWAYS 
The WIC updated its previous Demand Occupation List in September 2015, consistent with new WIOA requirements directing that state and local workforce systems to identify in-demand industry sectors and occupations and develop sector-focused workforce initiatives. The previous list only accounted for specific occupations, rather than groups of occupations within sectors that may be linked through Career Pathways and did not take into account different skill level and experience requirements between occupations. 
 
To produce its updated High-Demand Sectors and Occupations List, WIC staff worked with DOES’s Office of Labor Market Research and Performance (OLMRP) to develop a data set that captured projected job openings for each occupation over the next ten years in the District, weighted it to account for openings at or above the District’s Living Wage (currently $13.85 per hour), and sorted occupations into both sectors and skill levels (denoted by groupings of the US Department of Labor’s Job Zone categories, which account for relevant education, training, and experience needed to gain entry to an occupation). WIC staff analyzed this data set to identify key sectors and occupations for jobs generally requiring an Associate degree or less, which are most likely to have entry points and advancement opportunities for adult learners and better match the characteristics of the District’s unemployed residents and those not currently participating in the workforce. Analyses were shared broadly with several government stakeholders and other workforce experts to produce a final list of high-demand sectors and occupations within those sectors.  
 
The WIC’s six key high-demand Sectors for the District of Columbia are listed below: 
1. Business Administration and Information Technology, 
2. Construction, 
3. Healthcare, 
4. Infrastructure and Transportation, 
5. Hospitality, and 
6. Security and Law. 
 
The WIC has designated these six sectors as high-demand in the District, indicating that federal workforce funding from the US Department of Labor should be aligned with these areas, as well as most other workforce programming focused on individuals at the 
middle skills level or below –including job training and apprenticeship, and education up to the associate degree level. Within these six sectors, 86 occupations have been designated as high-demand in the District, which account for the majority of all average annual openings in each area 
 
The Career Pathways Task Force, a locally mandated task force convened by the WIC, worked within the WIC’s high-demand sector and occupation framework to assess relevant career pathways opportunities and formulated recommendations on next steps. To help inform the Task Force’s work, the WIC, with assistance from the DC Chamber of Commerce and Council for Adult and Experiential Learning (CAEL), convened focus groups of business stakeholders in each of these sectors and administered a follow-up survey to capture key information and facilitate the development of specific pathways that may be implemented in the District. Additional research by CAEL and WIC staff was incorporated with this feedback and data to produce career pathway profiles that reflect findings from these efforts.  
 
In PY2017, the WIC more than tripled the occupational skills training programs offered on the District’s Eligible Training Provider List.  The training programs offered were aligned with the six high-demand industries and career pathway profiles designated by the WIC.   
 
SECTION IV: CUSTOMER SATISFACTION 
The District maintains its commitment to ensuring customer service provided to all customers – jobseekers, employers, partners, and internal staff– is thorough, consistent, and effective.  DOES utilized multiple modes of data collection to garner valuable, comprehensive customer satisfaction feedback as a means of enhancing customer-interfacing programs. Proven methodologies used include customer service surveys, District and agency websites, social media, direct calls, letters, and visits to the American Job Centers. The feedback collected is evaluated to fully understand, as well as construct a viable means of effectively addressing customer concerns. Program Managers implement appropriate programmatic enhancements to any deficiencies noted in the feedback. Customer input was received through various mediums, including the AJCs, the DOES “Ask the Director” web page, and Grade.DC.Gov.  Below are descriptions of the mediums used to collect customer feedback and some initiatives that were implemented because of the feedback. 
 
A.1 American Job Centers 
AJC customers receive direct access to and support from DOES staff and partners to assist them in their job-search efforts. This wide-ranging accessibility to workforce-related programs, activities, and wrap-around services fosters a customer-focused delivery of service as demonstrated through the collection and evaluation of customer services survey cards. A database was created and is monitored regularly to ensure customer input is addressed.  AJCs solicit customer feedback in areas such as: knowledge of staff; professionalism of staff; helpfulness of staff; concern resolution; and overall satisfaction is leveraged to augment AJC service delivery. 
 
 
A.2 Ask the Director 
One of the agency’s comprehensive customer satisfaction feedback tools is the DOES “Ask the Director” feature accessible through the agency website, https://does.dc.gov/. Through this feature, customers are able to send questions, concerns, and comments directly to the Director of DOES.  Within the DOES “Ask the Director” web page, customers may leave their contact information for follow-up and may choose from a wide array of subjects, as well as tailor a message to suit their specific interests or needs. 
DOES leadership relies on the collection and thorough review of customer feedback to effectively address and improve programmatic processes, procedures, and outcomes, as well as service delivery strategies agency-wide. Once feedback is received by the Director, it is forwarded to the appropriate manager within the appropriate division for review, clarification, and comment to be sent back to the Director within 48 hours or two (2) business days, under normal circumstances. Corrective actions, if necessary, are finalized and implemented. The customer is notified by the agency of any actions and/or outcomes directly related to the inquiry or comment. All resulting determinations are thoroughly evaluated so that customer concerns are addressed and programmatic enhancements are made, as needed, based upon the feedback provided. Additionally, some feedback and inquiries are received through the District’s “Ask the Mayor” portal – similar to the “Ask the Director” tool with a broader scale and customer reach. 
 
A.3 Grade.DC.Gov 
Grade DC is an online customer feedback tool utilized District-wide to collect data regarding all aspects of government service delivery. This medium is accessible via the DOES website, as well as social media outlets – to include Facebook and Twitter – and allows residents to provide input, which may be used to strengthen government programs and services provided to District residents. Each agency is graded monthly on a scale of “A” through “F” to ensure deficiencies are identified and appropriately addressed. DOES’ grades are available at https://grade.dc.gov/. 
 
A.4 Daily Dispatch/The Oracle 
In July 2017, the agency introduced an internal newsletter, Daily Dispatch, to the DOES staff. The newsletter was designed to be an invaluable mouthpiece for internal stakeholders throughout the agency. The resulting content is a 360- view of what is going on in and around DOES. 
 
A.5 Customer Service Bill of Rights 
In October 2017, DOES made a bold commitment to improve the customer experience. The DOES established the Customer Service Bill of Rights that set clear standards and expectations for our customers when conducting business with our Agency staff, programs, or services. The Customer Service Bill of Rights is DOES’ commitment to deliver world-class customer service. In publishing the Bill of Rights, we have set a standard and expectation for all customers when interacting with DOES.  The Customer Service Bill of Rights has the highest level of commitment from all District leadership exemplified by the signature of Rashad M. Young, City Administrator. 
 
 
SECTION V: PERFORMANCE ACCOUNTABILITY 
The District’s performance goals for PY 2017 were established in cooperation with the U.S. Department of Labor’s Employment and Training Administration (ETA). This section covers performance and activities for Adults, Dislocated Workers, Youth, and Wagner-Peyser participants receiving WIOA services.   The performance data in the tables below provide a look at the employment outcomes of program participants who exited federally funded District workforce programs. The performance indicators measure Employment Rate-2nd quarter after exit, Employment Rate- 4th quarter after exit, Median Earnings, Credential Attainment Rate, and Measurable Skills Gain. DCNetworks is utilized by DOES as it workforce development management information system to document and meet the accountability and reporting requirements of the Department of Labor under WIOA.   
 
DCNetworks connects partner agencies, programs, providers and services electronically to facilitate the connection between employers and jobseekers.  DCNetworks is an integrated web-based system that provides jobseekers, training providers, employers, and UI applicants with 24-hour access to the agency’s comprehensive, employment-related program services and resources as well as access to local, regional, and national labor market information.   DCNetworks’ easy access to real-time labor market information, allows customers to compare information, such as, industry growth, wage rates; current opportunities, and education requirements for specific occupations.  DCNetworks also provides employers with viable solutions for online recruiting through use of advanced candidate search options; automated correspondence; and applicant tracking. The system also offers easy access to key reporting features that provide valuable information used for continuous program improvement and performance tracking.  
 
A.1 – Adult Program 
The District’s WIOA Adult Program provides quality employment and training services to assist eligible customers in obtaining the goals identified in their Individual Employment Plan.  The District’s Adult Program serves the broadest range of individuals, including: unemployment insurance claimants; returning citizens; individuals with disabilities; public assistance recipients, veterans, and individuals with a limited work history. The program is also designed to support employer-customers by assisting them in meeting their individual needs such as hiring skilled workers. 
 
Performance targets and outcomes for the WIOA Adult Program in PY 2017 may be found in Table 1 below.   In July 2016, the District conducted performance negotiations with DOLETA to establish performance targets for both PY 2016 and PY 2017.   The Negotiated Targets reflected in Table 1 below outlines the performance goals for both PY 2016 and PY 2017.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 1: WIOA Adult Program Performance- PY 2017 
WIOA Adult Performance
 

Performance Indicator 
 Negotiated Target 
 Actual 
 Percent of Target Achieved 
 
Employment Rate- 2nd Qtr after exit 
 62% 
 75.6% 
 122% 
 
Employment Rate- 4th Qtr after exit 
 68% 
 73.7% 
 108% 
 
Median Earnings 
 $6,200 
 $6,781 
 109% 
 
Credential Attainment Rate 
 54% 
 72% 
 133% 
 
Measurable Skills Gain 
 Baseline 
 31% 
 N/A 
 


 
In PY 2017, the District’s negotiated performance standard was 62 percent for Employment Rate- 2nd Quarter after exit, 68 percent for Employment Rate- 4th Quarter after exit, $6200 for Median Earnings, 54 percent for Credential Attainment Rate, and Measurable Skills Gain was baseline.   The actual Adult Employment Rate-2nd Qtr after exit of 75.6 percent exceeded the negotiated target; the 73.7 percent Employment Rate- 4th Qtr after exit exceeded the target of 68 percent. The Adult Median Earnings of $6,781 exceeded the target of $6200; and the Credential Attainment Rate of 72 percent also exceeded the negotiated target of 54%.    DOES also served a total of 1,386 WIOA Adult participants in PY 2017 and a total of 830 WIOA Adult participants were exited during the April 1, 2017 through March 31, 2018 reporting period.  In PY2017, the District’s WIOA Adult program exceeded all negotiated performance targets.  
 
A.2 – Dislocated Worker Program 
The WIOA Dislocated Worker Program is designed to transition laid-off workers back into the labor force – as quickly as possible – in sustainable unsubsidized employment. The goal of the program is to increase the retention and earnings of Dislocated Workers by strengthening their work readiness, educational attainment, occupational skills, and connecting them to careers in high-demand industries. The District delivered basic career, individualized career, and follow up services to Dislocated Worker customers at the AJCs, while many more benefited from self-service offerings via the DCNetworks system.  
 
Performance results for the WIOA Dislocated Worker Program for PY 2017 are located below in Table 2.  In PY 2017, the District’s negotiated performance target was 69.0 percent for Employment Rate- 2nd Quarter after exit, 85.0 percent for Employment Rate- 4th Quarter after exit, $7,500 for Median Earnings, and 57.0 percent for Credential Attainment Rate. The District’s actual Employment Rate- 2nd Qtr after exit of 76.4 percent exceeded the negotiated target; the 72.7 percent Employment Rate- 4th Qtr after exit exceeded the target; The DW Median Earnings of $8,756 exceeded the target of $7,500, and the Credential Attainment Rate of 74.0 percent also exceeded the negotiated target.  In PY2017, the District’s WIOA Dislocated Worker program exceeded all negotiated performance targets.  
Table 2: WIOA Dislocated Worker Program Performance– PY 2017 
WIOA Dislocated Worker Performance
 

Performance Indicator 
 Negotiated Target 
 Actual 
 Percent of Target Achieved 
 
Employment Rate- 2nd Qtr after exit 
 69% 
 76.4% 
 111% 
 
Employment Rate- 4th Qtr after exit 
 65% 
 72.7% 
 112% 
 
Median Earnings 
 $7,500 
 $8,756 
 117% 
 
Credential Attainment Rate 
 57% 
 74% 
 129% 
 
Measurable Skills Gain 
 Baseline 
 28.9% 
 N/A 
 


 
. 
A.3 – Youth Program 
The WIOA Year-Round Program is a federally-funded program serving District youth ages 16-24. This program offers services to young people under two (2) distinct divisions: 1) In-School Program; and 2) Out-of- School Program. The WIOA Youth Program provides employment and educational services to eligible youth between the ages of 14 and 24, who experience a barrier to employment.  
 
Performance results for the WIOA Youth Program in PY 2017 are found in Table 3 below.   In PY 2017, the District’s negotiated performance target was 51.0 percent for Employment Rate- 2nd Quarter after exit, 46.0 percent for Employment Rate- 4th Quarter after exit, 50.0 percent for Credential Attainment Rate, and Median Earnings and Measurable Skills Gain was baseline for PY 2016 and PY2017.  The actual Youth Employment Rate- 2nd Qtr after exit of 65.2 percent exceeded the negotiated target; the 70.3 percent Employment Rate- 4th Qtr after exit exceeded the target of 46%; and the 34.0 percent Credential Attainment rate accounted for 68.0 percent of the negotiated target; the Median Earnings and Measurable Skills Gain indicators were Baseline for PY 2016 and PY 2017. 
 
Table 3: WIOA Youth Program Performance – PY 2017 
WIOA Youth Performance
 

Performance Indicator 
 Negotiated Target 
 Actual 
 Percent of Target Achieved 
 
Employment Rate- 2nd Qtr after exit 
 51% 
 65.2% 
 128% 
 
Employment Rate- 4th Qtr after exit 
 46% 
 70.3% 
 153% 
 
Median Earnings 
 Baseline 
 $3,709 
 N/A 
 
Credential Attainment Rate 
 50% 
 34% 
 68% 
 
Measurable Skills Gain 
 Baseline 
 34.4% 
 N/A 
 


 
 
 
A.4 – Wagner- Peyser 
The Wagner-Peyser Program helps thousands of adult workers receive employment services.  These programs help employers find skilled workers and assist workers to obtain employment and training provider and program information. WP serves the fullest range of individuals, including returning citizens, Unemployment Insurance claimants, people with disabilities, public assistance recipients, veterans, homeless individuals, and individuals with no work history.  In PY 2017 the Wagner- Peyser program served 14,154 participants. 
 
Performance results for the Wagner-Peyser Program in PY 2017 are found in Table 4 below.   In PY 2017, the District’s negotiated performance target was 50.0 percent for Employment Rate- 2nd Quarter after exit, 79.0 percent for Employment Rate- 4th Quarter after exit, and $5,500 for Median Earnings.  The actual Wagner-Peyser Employment Rate- 2nd Qtr after exit of 58.2 percent exceeded the negotiated target; the 61.5 percent Employment Rate- 4th Qtr after exit accounted for 78.0 percent of the negotiated target; and the $5,645 Wagner-Peyser Median Earnings exceeded the target of $5,500. 
 
Table 4: Wagner-Peyser Program Performance – PY 2017 
Wagner
 

Performance Indicator 
 Negotiated Target 
 Actual 
 Percent of Target Achieved 
 
Employment Rate- 2nd Qtr after exit 
 50% 
 58.2% 
 116% 
 
Employment Rate- 4th Qtr after exit 
 79% 
 61.5% 
 78% 
 
Median Earnings 
 $5,500 
 $5,645 
 103% 
 


 
A.5 – Effectiveness in Serving Employers 
 
WIOA sec. 116(b)(2)(A)(i)(VI) required the US Department of Labor (DOL) and US Department of Education (ED) to establish a primary indicator of performance for effectiveness in serving employers.  This indicator is measured as a shared outcome across all six workforce development core programs within District of Columbia to ensure a holistic approach to serving employers. This indicator is reported on an annual basis; therefore, the reporting period for the effectiveness in serving employers indicator is the program year. 
 
The DOL and ED developed three approaches for measuring the effectiveness in serving employers and states had to select two approaches to pilot.  The District chose to pilot the Repeat Business Customers and Employer Penetration Rate approaches. 
 
The Repeat Business Customers approach will be helpful in determining whether employers who receive services from the core programs are satisfied with those services and become repeat customers. This approach also assesses the workforce system’s ability to develop and maintain strong relationships with employers over extended periods of time. 
 
The Employer Penetration Rate approach will be helpful in determining whether the core programs are serving a large portion of total employers in an area and are adequately meeting the workforce needs of the area. 
 
 
A.6 – Common Exit Policy 
 
Common exit occurs when a participant, enrolled in multiple partner programs, has not received services from any DOL-administered program, in which the participant is enrolled, for at least 90 days, and no future services are planned.  
 
The District currently operates under a common exit policy that includes the WIOA Title I Adult, Dislocated Worker, and Youth Programs, as well as Title III Wagner-Peyser Employment Service program. 
 
SECTION VI: EVALUATION ACTIVITIES 
 
In support of the District’s workforce programs, provider monitoring is conducted to ensure contracted providers procured through grant and human care agreement (HCA) awards are executed in accordance with their governing executed agreement, WIOA requirements, and all required federal laws, such as Americans with Disabilities Act.  Program year (PY) 2017 monitoring activities included grant and HCA desk reviews and site visits supporting approximately 25 WIOA-based agreements (grants and HCAs).  Currently, the last PY2017 follow-up monitoring activities are being executed to verify that all corrective measures have been finalized. Though not posted for public viewing, a list can be provided upon request. 
 
As of PY2018, the DOES monitoring plan encompasses a risk-based model that administers provider monitoring and tracks program progress in accordance with each provider’s assigned risk designation per the risk rubric shown below in Table 5.  At present, there are two (2) provider-based assessments: 1) the DOES Provider Risk Assessment; and 2) the WIOA Sub-recipient Risk Assessment.  The current Risk Assessment plan is as follows: 
 
Provider Risk Assessments – assigned to and completed by an authorized provider stakeholder and include the following assessment areas: 
• Staffing and Operations – provision of the following details for the entity: current staffing levels, lines of authority, and governing board of directors; 

• Values and Ethics – description of entity code of conduct principles and its dissemination; 

• Policies and Procedures – description of the process by which documents governing day-to-day operations are produced, updated, and disseminated to the program team; 


• Personally Identifiable Information (PII) – description of how staff are trained to maintain and safeguard programmatic proprietary information;  

• Contract Administration – description of contractual details, such as: contracting vehicle, scope of services, period of performance, award amount, expenditures to date, mandatory provider deliverables, and credential attainment; 

• Program Compliance – description of compliance activities, such as monitoring of program sub-recipients; 

• Fiscal and Administrative Operations – description of accounting and administrative policies and processes surrounding cash disbursements, prepaid program purchases, fixed assets and inventory, payables and disbursements, procurement and contracting, payroll and human resources, and fiscal sub-recipient monitoring; 

• Information Technology – description of policies and assigned levels of authority as it pertains to IT systems, backing up data, and disaster recovery; and 

• Previous Risk Areas – a disclosure of internal and external programmatic reviews, such as DOL monitoring, previous monitoring, and District of Columbia City Administrator Audit reports.  


 
WIOA Sub-Recipient Risk Assessments – assigned to DOES providers who are performing DOES WIOA administrative functions to include participant eligibility determination as delineated in the Uniform Administrative Requirements - 2 CFR 200.93.  The WIOA Sub-Recipient Risk Assessment will be conducted in two parts: A) the completion of the Provider Risk Assessment; and B) the completion of the WIOA Sub-Recipient Risk Assessment tool (an Excel file).  The WIOA Subrecipient Risk Assessment tool places a greater emphasis on discerning the organizational contractual compliance and governing accounting principles, such as general ledger and financial statement review as well as accounting system information.  Presently, DOES has no WIOA sub-recipients. 
Provider and WIOA Sub-Recipient Risk Assessment forms will be emailed to the appropriate stakeholder for completion and submission.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Risk Level Designation 
Table 5 –Provider and Sub-Recipient Risk Level Designation 
 
 Low Risk 
 Moderate Risk 
 High Risk 
 

Program / Entity Risk Indicators 
 No documented history of:  
• drastic changes in staffing levels and personnel;  

• program compliance shortfalls;  

• disallowed program costs;  

• Instances of fraud or disbarment. 


 Some documented history1 of:  
• Numerous changes in staffing levels and personnel;  

• Periodic program compliance shortfalls;  

• Disallowed program costs; and; 

• No instances of fraud or disbarment. 


 
 Documented history of:  
• Drastic changes in staffing levels and personnel;  

• Sustained program compliance shortfalls;  

• Disallowed program costs; and  

• Possible instances of fraud or disbarment. 


 
Instances where there are fraud convictions and/or debarment is found, the entity will be immediately assessed for contract cancellation and/or appropriate action. 
 
Monitoring Methodology 
 Low level risk designated entities will undergo basic program, fiscal, and operation monitoring efforts with a two (2) percent file sampling size and follow-up activities as needed. 
 Moderate level risk designated entities will undergo a more basic program, fiscal, and operation monitoring efforts with a four (4) percent file sampling size and follow-up activities as needed. 
 High level risk designated entities will undergo a monitoring of program, fiscal, and operations reviews tailored specifically to the areas of concern with a six (6) percent file sampling size and follow-up activities every three months. 
 


1 Not more than two (2) concerns noted, but not more than one (1) concern in for any of the categories listed therein. 
 
Evidence Collection 
Provider stakeholders must provide evidence to verify the statements purported on their respective risk assessments.  Verification documents must be submitted along with the completed risk assessment form(s).  Provider Risk Assessments must be completed and submitted to DOES monitoring staff, along with corresponding verification documents, within 14 calendar days of distribution. 
 
SECTION VII: OTHER PROGRAMS 
 
A.1 Rapid Response (RR): Authorized under the Workforce Investment and Opportunity Act (WIOA), RR is a proactive, employee-focused program designed to assist Dislocated Workers in transitioning into new employment opportunities. The goal of the RR program is two-fold: 1) provide resources to companies in both private and government sectors; and 2) respond to layoffs and closings by coordinating services and providing immediate aid to companies and their affected workers. In this regard, RR is 
beneficial to employees experiencing downsizing but is also geared to growing companies who need a pool of skilled workers who are readily available. 
 
The RR team responds within 48 hours of receiving notice of Reduction in Force (RIFS), mass layoffs, or company closings and works to quickly coordinate services with the employer. The District follows federal guidelines under the Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification (WARN) Act to trigger the delivery of services.  
 
In PY 2017 the Rapid Response team received five (5) Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notifications.  The Employers, listed in Table 6 below, were contacted, and immediate assistance was offered to the employers and affected workers.   
 
Table 6- WARN Notifications 
Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notifications 
 

Notice Date 
 Organization Name 
 Number of Employees Affected 
 Effective Layoff Date 
 Code Type 
 
8-Jun-18 
 PESystems. Inc. 
 89 
 10-Aug-18 
 Layoff 
 
2-Mar-18 
 Centerra Group, LLC 
 243 
 31-Mar-18 
 Layoff 
 
17-Aug-17 
 Providence Hospital 
 268 
 16-Oct-17 
 Layoff 
 
28-Jul-17 
 First Potomac Realty Trust 
 24 
 1-Oct-17 
 Layoff 
 
7-Jul-17 
 Black Entertainment Television 
 55 
 5-Sep-17 
 Permanent Closure 
 


 
A.2 Veteran Services Program: 
The Department of Employment Services has an unwavering commitment to support veterans seeking employment.  Leading this work is the Veterans’ Services Program, which ensures all Honorably Discharged Veterans receive priority over non-veterans in a multitude of services, including career assessments, job counseling, job referrals and targeted hiring events, and are educated on the preferences made available to veterans seeking employment in the private and government employment sectors.  Through funds from USDOL’s non-competitive Jobs for Veterans State Grants (JVSG) Program, AJC staff assists veterans as they seek employment, training, and placement services under qualified job training programs.  In the District one (1) Local Veterans Employment Representative (LVER), four (4) Disabled Veterans Outreach Program (DVOP) specialists, and one (1) Program Coordinator provide services to District veterans with significant barriers to employment.   
 
The LVERs develop hiring opportunities within the local area by contacting businesses, federal agencies and contractors, and other employer associations to encourage the hiring and advancement of qualified veterans.  DVOPs provide specialized intensive employment assistance to eligible veterans who have special employment and training needs.   LVERs and DVOPs provide resources and expertise to assist and prepare our clients to maximize their employment opportunities and protect their employment rights.  The District recognizes that through their service, veterans gain valuable 
knowledge, strengthened characters, and transferable skills, but that translating and marketing those skills to the civilian labor market can sometimes be a challenge. That is why we make an effort to have veterans serving veterans, so that shared experiences and a mutual understanding of skills can enhance the quality of services provided to this special population.  All JVSG program participants are enrolled in Wagner-Peyser and some participants are WIOA enrolled. 
 
SECTION VIII: PROMISING PRACTICES/SUCCESS STORIES 
The District’s WIOA Title I and Title III programs rely on many other programs and partners to leverage funding streams and deliver the broad scope of services our residents require.  Efficiently leveraging resources across the District will help to address the barriers residents face in obtaining employment and allow them to enter and complete education and training programs leading to employment and self-sufficiency. Funded through both federal and local dollars, these programs support residents along their career pathways by providing supportive services, education and training, work experiences, and workforce activities.  Although not exhaustive, descriptions of the partner programs and the services that support and supplement co-enrolled Title I and Title III participants are listed below. 
 
PROMISING PRACTICES 
 
DC Infrastructure Academy: 
The District of Columbia Infrastructure Academy (DCIA) is a key initiative of the Mayor Muriel Bowser's Administration and led by the Department of Employment Services. Infrastructure is one of the fastest growing industries in the country.  The training and services offered by the DC Infrastructure Academy are designed to meet the need for skilled infrastructure professionals in Washington, DC. DCIA coordinates, trains, screens, and recruits residents to fulfill the needs of the infrastructure industry and infrastructure jobs with leading companies in this high-demand field.  DCIA is in the Anacostia neighborhood in Ward 8.  All program participants are Wagner-Peyser enrolled with some also participating in WIOA programs. 
 
Back to Work 50+:  
The District of Columbia has a diverse population of talented job seekers looking to enter or reenter the workforce and assume roles as productive, full-time employees. This universe of job seekers includes valued community members between the ages of 50 and 64 that were previously employed and are ready to get back to work! Back to Work 50+ at DC DOES (BTW50+) is an exciting initiative launched by the Department of Employment Services in collaboration with AARP Foundation that expands employment opportunities for mature job seekers from all eight wards of the District.  Employers value experienced and dependable job candidates and BTW50+ delivers those candidates. Program participants are enrolled in the Wagner-Peyser Program. 
 
Office of Apprenticeship, Information and Training (OAIT): 
OAIT is responsible for administering the District’s Apprenticeship program and the enforcement of DC Law 2-156 and the federal Davis-Bacon and Related Acts (DBRA) on 
District-funded projects. These services include recruiting and enrolling apprentices; registering employers as apprenticeship sponsors; and providing oversight, technical assistance, and monitoring to ensure compliance with federal and state laws. This program is a comprehensive training that combines on-the-job learning experiences with supplemental job-related classroom instruction.  
 
Pre-Apprenticeships: 
The District is one of the few jurisdictions that directly funds pre-apprenticeship programs.  DOES’s Office of Apprenticeship, Information and Training (“D.C. Office of Apprenticeship”) funds several pre-apprenticeship training programs for District residents. One particular hybrid model gives District residents the advantage of earning wages during their initial training period. This pre-apprenticeship training is a preparatory training initiative that prepares District residents to qualify for established registered apprenticeship programs. These programs are targeted to serve hard to employ residents, particularly those residents with certain deficiencies in math, aptitude testing and job readiness. 
 
Pre-apprenticeship training initiatives have been an effective tool to increase the number of District residents in existing apprenticeship opportunities. These programs are approved, overseen and funded by the District and run by labor union entities and companies with existing approved apprenticeship programs, recognized by the District of Columbia. In order for these entities to participate they must commit to increasing the number of District resident apprentices in their apprenticeship program by accepting all successful completers of the pre-apprenticeship program as apprentices. 
 
The District is one of three jurisdictions in the country that has a mandatory apprenticeship registration requirement; the District established the “Step-up Apprentice” classification, which gives District residents another avenue to qualify for union apprenticeship programs. Step-up Apprentices are indentured in the same as regular apprentices; however, this classification gives District residents, who may have slight deficiencies, a year-period to meet full apprenticeship eligibility requirements while gaining credit towards their program.  All pre-apprentices are enrolled in Wagner-Peyser Program and some are enrolled in WIOA if additional support is needed.  In PY 2017, the District partnered with seven District employers to provide pre-apprenticeship training opportunities to residents.  Those employers include Dynamic Concepts (Construction), Community Hub for Opportunities in Construction Employment (Construction), WDC Solar (Solar installation), Community Services Agency (Construction), Simple Technology (Information Technology), DC Central Kitchen (Hospitality), and Miller and Long DC (Construction).  
 
DC Jail Work Reentry Program: 
The District wants to ensure all residents who seek employment services – including those who have recently been incarcerated have access to comprehensive support to enter the workforce. District residents pending release from incarceration face a unique set of challenges when seeking to obtain employment. Limited employment history, inadequate educational credentials, substance abuse and mental health challenges are but a few of the obstacles faced by the clients this partnership serves. Through the 
development of life skills, job training, and basic computer training participants are better prepared for the employment challenges they will face upon release. To that end, the DC Jail Work Reentry Program was established in July 2015 in partnership with the Department of Corrections (DOC), to provide intensive 6-week job training for incarcerated persons with an impending release date. This program enhances the availability of employment options for returning citizens by beginning the process of reintegration prior to release. 
 
Inmates face a thorough screening and assessment to determine eligibility and suitability for the program. Those who are selected are transferred to an exclusive housing unit that is designated solely for the DJ Jail Work Reentry Program. A new cohort of no more than 20 participants begins approximately every six weeks. Job Readiness Class is held Monday through Friday from 9am to 4pm.The program offers a multitude of services including: job readiness workshops and classes, which closely parallel the Project Empowerment program, hands-on computer training through a contracted computer instructor; case management for wrap-around services; and post-release services. Perhaps, the most exciting thing about this program is that those participants who take advantage of Project Empowerment referrals are able to start earning a wage almost immediately after being released. For these participants, the transition is significantly easier. The remaining graduates have an open invitation to join Project Empowerment and receive weekly follow-up from an American Job Center case manager.  Program participants are Wagner-Peyser enrolled and upon release have the opportunity to enroll in other District workforce programs including the WIOA Adult program.  
 
SUCCESS STORIES 
Wagner
 
W. Randall visited AJC SE in May 2018 seeking employment assistance. Customer expressed his 
 
A. Jones came into the 
 
Veteran Success Stories 
 


Veteran A. Granberry
 
Veteran M. Glasby had been working with AJCNW DVOP Roland Gutierrez since November 2017. 
 
Adult Success Story 
 
M. Waller was a fifty
 
R. Moore interviewed with Columbia Enterprises, Inc in September of 2017 for a Project Assistant 
 
Dislocated Worker Success Story 
 
C. Lowery, a 62


 

Youth Success Stories 
 
Damon Dukes enrolled 
 


Kevin Jackson enrolled in the Nai Xander
 
Similarly, Rodney Fisher who enrolled in the Nai Xander Program on 11/14/2017 has also 
 
Alicia Alexander participated in Westlink Career Institute’s EMT Training Program. After passing 
 


 
SECTION IX: WAIVERS 
 
The District of Columbia did not have any approved Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act Waivers during PY 2017.   

