












L O UI S I A N A
ii Iii WORKFORCE
...	COMMISSION

Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act Program Year 2017
Annual Report























w ww. l aw or k s . n et






LOUISIANA
iiiii WORKFORCE
...	COMMIS    S I ON

1001 North 23rd Street Post Office Box 94094
Baton Rouge, LA 70804-9094

Office of the Secretary

(0) 225-342-3001
(F) 225 -3 42-2051
www.laworks.net


John Bel Edwards, Governor
Ava Dejoie, Secretary




December 14, 2018


I am pleased to present the 2017 Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act Annual Report for Louisiana, which covers the activities, achievements and challenges of the Louisiana Workforce Commission from July 1, 2017, through June 30, 2018.
The past fiscal year has shown continued workforce successes throughout the agency even amidst still-changing environments after the transition to the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA).
You will see in the following report where we have excelled and delivered more services to more people than previously in several of our programs.  This has been through a process of continuous quality improvement and process redesign of some of our key statewide programs.
Louisiana met or exceeded all nine performance measures under the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act during 2017. We can say we have successfully navigated significant changes in the Law and although there is more to do, we continue to make progress at the State and Local level.
Our community partnerships have come to fruition in the form of additional apprenticeship programs, Industry Sector Partnerships, customized trainings, and State inter-agency collaborations that continue to fulfill our mission of "Putting People to Work" by providing State support and guidance in implementation.
This Annual Report provides a review of how we are implementing the strategies outlined in the Combined State Plan that are helping to prepare Louisiana workers, educators and workforce partners for the improving employment trend that is projected through at least 2024.
Louisiana continues to be well positioned to maximize oppmtunities for leveraging WIOA resources in our communities to develop our workforce.


· Sincerely,
/t_M
ejoiye
Secretary




I Equal Opportunity Employer/Program I Auxiliary aids and services are available upon request to individuals with disabilities • TDD# 800-259-5154 I

Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act Program Year 2017
Annual Report

STRATEGIC VISION
The Louisiana Workforce Investment Council (WIC), the state's workforce board, supports development of an employer-led, demand-d riven workforce development system based on occupational forecasts in which training, education and services for job-seekers prepare Louisiana residents for high­ wage, high-demand career opportunities in Louisiana.
Louisiana's stakeholders envision a workforce system that will provide pathways for all Louisianans, including individuals who are receiving public assistance, those who are the unemployed or underemployed, those who are deficient in basic skills, as well as persons with disabilities, including disabled veterans and others who have significant barriers to employment. All will have access to education, training and the supportive services needed to prepare for and secure high-demand occupations that pay family-sustaining wages.
To achieve this, LWC set forth Strategic Goals and Objectives. The following outlines the objectives that received particular focus and contributed to success.
Establish Career Pathways as a model for skill, credential and degree attainment for Louisiana citizens to secure jobs that provide opportunities for economic independence and family stability.
The objectives for this goal in which LWC was largely successful during the 2017 program year were to:

1. Engage employers and integrate sector strategy principles to ensure multiple employers, business associations and organized labor are partners in creating demand-driven career pathways, and;
2. Expand utilization of registered apprenticeship by industry sector employers to train workers and meet occupational demands.
Expand career services and opportunities for populations facing multiple barriers to close the gap in educational attainment and economic advancement through career pathways and improved career services and the expansion of bridge programs.
The objectives for this goal in which LWC was largel y successful during the 2017 program year were to:
1. Expand and incentivize the utilization of evidenced-based workforce strategies that support targeted populations (e.g., the long-term unemployed, indi viduals with disabilities, veterans, out-of-school youth) into sector-based career pathway initiatives to achieve similar outcomes relative to other populations;

2. Enhance and expand the delivery of integrated re-entry and employment strategies to reduce recidivism among Louisiana's returning citizens and to meet the skill and workforce needs of business and industry;
3. Foster the improvement and expansion of employer-driven regional sector partnerships to meet occupational demands as supported by regional labor market information; and
4. Develop focused, regional workforce initiatives that blend partner resources (co- investment) to educate and train workers for jobs within the workforce region.
Through these efforts, using our integrated service delivery system with community and State partners, implementation of new Industry Sector relationships, quality Career and Training services, and continuous quality improvement Louisiana met or exceeded overall performance in all measures.

WIOA TITLE I -IV PERFORMANCE AND ACTIVITIES
Meeting/Exceeding WIA Performance Measures
As the LWC implemented programs aimed at young people, veterans, difficult-to-employpopulations and initiatives for Louisiana's broader workforce, the state met or exceeded all nine WIOAPerformance Measures for program year 2017.
Waivers
In Program Year 2017, the Louisiana Workforce Commission did not request any additional waivers.
Effectiveness in Serving Employers
Louisiana has selected employer penetration rate and repeat -customer rate as measures of perfonnance for effectiveness in serving employers.
Louisiana has developed a package of relationships, services, and strategies to meet the needs of area businesses and targeted industry sectors. These relationships will allow Louisiana to increase overall utilization and value received from the workforce system, reduce employer costs to recruit and hire qualified workers, and decrease the time needed to fill vacancies.
While each Local Workforce Development Area (LWDA) is responsible for employer engagement in its respective local area, a regional approach is used to ensure employers receive services from a broad array of stakeholders to include:
1. Targeted Sector Partnerships
2. Wagner-Peyser Employer Services
3. Veterans
4. Adult/Dislocated WorkerNouth programs
5. Louisiana Rehabilitation Services
6. Incumbent Worker Training Program
7. Rapid Response
8. Adult Education
9. Department of Corrections
10. Parish Court Systems
11. Other stakeholders that engage employers

Sector Strategies LWC is developing for each of the eight regions and Industry Sector Partnerships have been launched in four of the eight regions. LWC has assigned Industry Sector Specialists to support each region by engaging business and industry and assisting with the identification of short-term and long­ term workforce needs and to assist the local boards with developing goals, objectives and strategies to address these needs. Additional information on the details of industry sector efforts is outlined later in this document.
By creating relationships with employers, establishing customized business services, engaging targeted industry sectors, and monitoring perfonnance, Louisiana has been able to achieve an employer penetration rate of20.7% among employers with 20 or more employees while maintaining a 59.1% repeat-customer level among the same employer base.
Research and Evaluation
The State Workforce Development Board used labor market research conducted by our Office of Information Services to keep abreast of the Star Jobs data, providing up-to-date labor market information for the state. This data is used by Regional and State level Economic Development and Education agencies to partner in the development of career pathways and other workforce training initiatives.
Common Exit
At LWC, co-enrollment occurs when a participant is enrolled in programs covered by two or more WIOA funding sources at once or is receiving both WIOA-funded services and non-WIOA services simultaneously or sequentially in the context of a set of common goals and objectives. At the time of exit, all Partner Programs shall take the identical exit outcome for Participants when all Partner Program services end at the same time. If the participant enters unsubsidized employment, all funding sources will show the placement.
Statewide Performance:
Adult, Dislocated Worker and Youth Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act Program Performance Measures:
Data collected on the Primary Indicators of Performance are collected from the LWC's jobs portal; fun HiRE (Helping Individuals Reach Employment), from Unemployment Insurance Wages Records, and from the Wage Record Interchange System (WRIS). The HiRE system gathers exit information about participants and real-time data is used to measureperformance.
A review of the statistical adjushnent model predicted outcomes and data supporting the proposed performance targets resulted in the enclosed chart which summarizes Louisiana's agreed-upon perfonnance levels.

Performance Levels for WIOAAdult	PY 2016	PY 2017Employment Rate 2nd Quarter After Exit60.2%60.2%Employment Rate 4th Quarter After Exit62.5%62.5%Median Earnings 2nd Quarter After Exit$4,570$4,570Credential Attainment64.3%64.3%Dislocated WorkerEmployment Rate 2nd Quarter After Exit64.1%64.1%Employment Rate 4th Quarter After Exit62.7%62.7%Median Earnings 2nd Quarter After Exit$6,059$6,059Credential Attainment55.4%55.4%Youth Common MeasuresEducation or Training Activ1ties or Employment in the 2nd Quarter after Exit63.2%63.2%Education or Training Activ1ties or Employment in the 4th Quarter after Exit65.5%65.5%Credential Attainment54.9%54.9%


Program Year 2017 Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act Program Performance


Negotiat ed	Actual	Percent of Goal
Program	Goal	Pe1:forma11ce	Attained PY 2017AdultEmployment Rate 2nd Quarter After Exit60.2%63.9%106%Employment Rate 4th Quarter After Exit62.5%62.4%100%Median Earnings 2nd Quarter After Exit$4,570$5,832.00128%Credential Attainment64.3%77.1%120%Dislocated WorkerEmployment Rate 2nd Quarter After Exit64.1%61.2%95%Employment Rate 4th Quarter After Exit62.7%59.9%96%
Median Earnings 2nd Quarter After Exit$6,059$7,293.00120%Credential Attainment55.4%86.7%156%Youth Common MeasuresEducation or Training Activities or Employment in the 2nd Quarter after Exit
63.2%
73.9%
117%Education or Training Activities or Employment in the 4th Quarter after Exit65.5%71.8%110%Credential Attainment54.9%60.4%110%

Adult Program
The Adult WIOA Program Performance for PYI7 met one of four negotiated goal objectives (Employment Rate 4th Quarter after Exit), while exceeding three of the four negotiated goal objectives (Employment Rate 2nd Quarter after Exit, Median Earning 2nd Quarter after Exit, and Credential Attainment). The number of individual participants funded by the WIOA Adult program in PY 2017 was 10,751. LWC and its local partners continue to be experts at delivering Adult Training and Employment Services.
Dislocated Worker Program
The Dislocated Worker WIOA Program Performance for PY! 7 met two of four negotiated goal objectives (Employment Rate 2nd Quarter after Exit and Employment Rate 4th Quarter after exit), while exceeding two out of four negotiated goal objectives (Median Earnings 2nd Quarter after Exit and Credential Attainment). The number of individual participants funded by the WIOA Adult program in PY 2017 was 3,116. As the unemployment rate in Louisiana declines, efforts have focused on identifying long-term unemployed as potential Dislocated Worker participants. This is a learning process, and as a result of declining Dislocated Worker enrollment, LWC is focusing on providing more robust training and technical assistance for identifying and recruiting persons who may not consider themselves in need of services in addition to improving integration between Rapid Response, TAA, and WIOA.
Youth Common Measures
In PY 2017, the state exceeded three out of three of the following youth common measures: Employment Rate 2nd Quarter after Exit, Employment Rate 4th Quarter after Exit and Credential Attaimnent.
Louisiana does not have a defined service delivery model for WIOA Youth Services. Each Local Workforce Development Board (LWDB) has the autonomy to develop its local youth service model. However, these models must support the implementation of Career Pathways that support postsecondary education, and address the needs oflow-income in-school youth as well as out-of-school youth, and support pre-apprenticeship to Registered Apprenticeship opportunities. LWC requires each LWDB to competitively procure and provide all fourteen of the program service elements. LWC has committed to

assisting the LWDBs through the One Stop partners, to develop and provide age- and developmentally­ appropriate models for out of school youth.
In accordance with the Law, Louisiana requires that at least 75% of all youth participants served under WIOA be out-of-school youth. In PY 2017, there were 1,764 Youth participants served in the Youth programs throughout state. In addition , Louisiana requires that 20% of all expenditures are on Youth Work Experience Activities.
The Youth work-based learning programs in the local areas have traditionally focused on Summer Youth Programs. In 2017, this continued, but implementation of year-round Work Experiences increased. LWC will continue its efforts in guiding Local Boards in ensuring their contracted One-Stop Operators meet their minimum expenditure requirements using appropriate WIOA strategies such as year-round Work Experience.
Another challenge some areas face are schools that are not engaging the services of the Local Workforce Development Operators because they do not want to identify their drop-out population. LWC made efforts in 2017 to work with these schools to encourage them to refer the individuals to the Workforce system for High School Equivalency Test (HiSET).
Participants in the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Activities
The charts below illustrate Louisiana's historical results, indicating the state's commitment of continuous improvement through Integrated Services Delivery model that consistently provides services to individuals while maintaining quality outcomes.
Enrollment in Individualized Career Services and Training decreased in 2017 as performance was achieved. Although enrollment decreased, the State met performance was met. Quality of service was high. As we discuss initiatives and activities further in this document, it will show that this is influenced by an integrated, collaborative approach to Workforce services that LWC and its partners have implemented. Our future efforts will focus on continued quality improvement while increasing levels of service.

Three -Year Progress of the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act Program

Program
AdultProgram Year 2015	Program Year 2016Participants293,897Not ReportedEntered Employment Rate63.9%Not ReportedEmployment Retention Rate82.8%Not ReportedAverage Earnings$14,527Not ReportedDislocated WorkerParticipants12,165Not ReportedEntered Employment Rate65.9%Not ReportedJob Retention Rate84.4%Not ReportedAverage Earnings$20,293Not ReportedYouth Common MeasuresParticipants1,447Not ReportedPlacement in Employment or Education70.2%Not ReportedAttainment of Degree or Certificate71.9%Not ReportedLiteracy and Numeracy Gains56.2%Not Reported

Program	ProgramYear2017AdultNumber Serve-di (P art ic ipa nt s)1 0,7 51N um b er Ex it ed' (P articipant s)13,480Employment Rate 2nd Quarter After Exit63. 9%Employm ent Rat e 4th Quart er Aft er Ex it62.4%M edian E arning s 2nd Quarter A fter Exit$5,832Credential Attainment77.1%Measu rableS kill Gains37.7%Disloca ted WorkerNumberS erved (P articipan ts)3,11 6Number Ex it ed (P arti cipa nt s)4, 654E mployment Rate 2nd Quarter After Exit61.2%Employment Rate 4th Quarter After Exit59.9%Median Earnings 2nd Quarter After Exit$,7  2 93Credent ial A tt ainm ent86.7%Measurable Skill Gains35.2%Youth Common MeasuresNumber Sen,·ed (P articipants)1,764Number Ex it ed (Participa nts)793Employment Rat e 2nd Quarter After Ex it73.9%Employ ment Rate 4th Quarter After Exit71.8%Median Earnings 2nd Quarter After Exit$3,067Credential Atta.inm ent60 . 4%M eas urable S k ill Ga ins33 .5 %
NOT E: Results are based on U.S. Depa rtment of Labor Co mmon Measu resde finitions.


Cost of Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act ivit ies
For the purposes of cost comparison, funding stream expenditures were divided by the number of total participants served for the program year to derive a cost per participant. Using this method, the cost per participant for Career Services by funding stream for PYl 7 is estimated as follows: Adults, $744 Dislocated Workers, $2,610 and Youth, $5,266. The cost per participant for Training Services by funding stream for PYl 7 is estimated as follows: Adults, $1,648; Dislocated Workers, $3,319 and Youth, $6,087.

Summary lnformalion:AdulrSel\iceParticipantsSe11ice    Participants Exrted Cohort Period: 4/1/17-3/31/18    Funds Expended Cohort Period: 711117W18Cost Per Participants
CohortPeriod:7/1/17-6/30/18CareerSeMces8.97012,466S6,6TT,657$744Training Sel\ices1,7811,014$2,93.5795$1,648Percenttraining-related employemnr:10.Percentenrolled in more than one core prog<am: 88.8%PercentAdmin Expended:14.4\li
Summary lnformalion:Dis/ocaredWorke<Sel\iceParticipants Se11iceParticipants Exrted
Cohort Period: 4/1/17-3/31/18     Funds Expended Cohort Period: 7/1/17.6/JOMBCost Per Participants
Cohort Period: 7/1/17-6/30/18Career Se"'ices2,5634.25156,689,095$2,610Training Sel\ices553403Sl,835.191$3,319Percenttraining-relatedemplO'J'elllllr: 10.3\liPercent enrolled in more than one core progmra  : 97.8%PercentAdmin Expended:15.3%
Summary lnformalion:YouthSe11iceParticipants Seriice    Participants Exrted Cohort Period:4/1/17.3/31/18     Funds Expended Cohort Period: 7/1M7-6/JOJ18Cost PerParticipants
CohortPeriod:7/1/17-6/30/18Career Ser,,ices1,331540$7,008,919$5,266TrainingSel\ices43325352,635,647$6,087Percent training-related employemnr:14.3\liPercent enrolled in more than one core progmra : 68.7%Percent Amd  inExpended: 19.6%
1 AppliestoTitle Ion

While the LWC achieved performance, the agency' s biggest challenge has been a decline in WIOA enrollment. This can be attributed to a number of factors, some of which have been addressed in previous comments regarding Adult, Dislocated Worker and Youth performance. LWC will revise its approach to Priority Populations by implementing continuous process improvement strategies that have shown ways to ensure these participants are recruited for WIOA participation.
Adult Education Integration with One-Stop Partners
LCTCS supported the integration of activities sponsored under the AEFLA in multiple areas relative to adult education, career development, and employment and training activities.
WRU and One-Stop centers coordinated partnerships in an effort to provide shared, unduplicated services. WRU partnered with each of the 15 LWDBs to nominate local adult education supervisors for appointment to their board. This coordination and communication provided opportunities for Title II

representatives to serve on the LWDSs and act as a conduit for the exchange of information. LCTCS leadership participated in all appropriate committee and board activities with regard to the State agencies responsible for Workforce, Corrections, Higher Education, and Economic Development. In an effort to stay infonned of the latest board activities across the state, WRU and adult education staff serving as newly-elected board members met, bimonthly, via conference calls and a virtual meeting platform provided by LCTCS Online.
In accordance with WIOA regulations, shared infrastructure costs of the One-Stop Delivery System was accomplished through equipment contribution at the local level. The WorkReady U - Adult Education comprehensive literacy center in each region provided an interactive kiosk at each certified One-Stop.
The interactive kiosk is in real-time and provides direct telephone access and chat feature for on-demand assistance to trained enrollment management specialists. Phase I of the kiosk content design has been completed for the AEFLA program and postsecondary career and technical education activities authorized under Carl D. Perkins Career and Technical Education Act of 2006. Phase I has the capability to collect basic intake infonnation so that an individual's needs can be assessed and immediate referrals to one-stop partners and/or business services are available. Phase II will be completed in Spring 2019 and provide information for local educational and training opportunities/services available within each local area. The system will offer geo-mapping to assist users with advance search methods (zip code, career cluster interest, etc.) to obtain information for a nearby specialized program. Phase 3 will include specific non-core partner infonnation with an anticipated completion date ofFall 2019.
Title II infrastructure contribution will be evaluated on a periodic and/or annual basis to determine effectiveness. Data reports will be collected from the kiosk system to support the return-on-investment.
Louisiana Rehabilitation Services
The mission of Louisiana Rehabilitation Services (LRS) is to assist persons with disabilities in obtaining or maintaining employment and independence in the community, working with business and other community services. In March of 2018, the Governor signed an executive order that created a task force including 15 members appointed from the leadership of state agencies to develop policies, strategies, and services to increase employment of individuals with disabilities in state employment.
LRS, along with other members ofLWC, participated as members of the State as a Model Employer (SAME) task force. This task force conducted a survey of all state employees statewide to determine the current numbers of staff employed in state government who have disabilities.
The task force also developed a plan to define strategies to increase opportunities for individuals with disabilities to be considered for state positions when hiring occurs. As part of this plan, a point of contact was designated by each department (typically the HR manager). LRS also designated a primary Point of Contact to serve as a liaison with the other departmental managers and insure access of persons with disabilities to job openings they meet the qualifications to apply for as the openings occur.
This Point of Contact system has the following goals:

(1) Increase access of job applicants with disabilities to hiring managers in state government;

(2) provide for an effective and efficient means to exchange information relative to job applicants with disabilities;
(3) provide for consistency and uniformity in regards to hiring protocols;

(4) serve as an initial contact for state agencies seeking to hire persons with disabilities; and
(5) serve as a resource to coordinate training and capacity building for American Job Centers (AJCs) in regards to serving persons with disabilities, and most especially those assigned to an Order of Selection Category not being served by LRS.
Increased interactions between persons with disabilities and hiring managers in state government will help to dispel myths, stereotypes, biases, and negative attitudes toward persons with disabilities and will result in an increase in positive attitudes toward persons with disabilities, and consequently, result in an increase of persons hired.
The Vocational Rehabilitation Program (VR)
 Vocational Rehabilitation provides a planned sequence of individualized services to assist persons with disabilities reach employment. It is a partnership between a Vocational Rehabilitation Counselor and the individual with a disability. They work together to develop an individualized employment plan that is specific to the unique strengths, resources, concerns, abilities, interests, and infonned choice of the individual. The plan identifies the VR services the individual needs in order to achieve their employment goals.
These are comprehensive services that go far beyond those found in typical job training programs, and include such services as:
I. assessment, career guidance and counseling;
2. work readiness and placement;
3. vocational and other training;
4. prosthetics, orthotics, transportation;
5. interpreters and readers; and
6. assistive technology.
In Program Year 2017, 1,020 individuals obtained employment as a result of the VR program. The average hourly earnings of these individuals was $12.1O; with average annual earnings of$20,38 l. Of those obtaining successful employment, 82% obtained employment in Louisiana's top-demand occupations. This can be attributed in part to training provided to the Rehabilitation Counselors to insure that they are knowledgeable when providing vocational guidance to individuals so they may choose a career goal that is in demand.
Order of Selection
When LRS does not have sufficient funding and/or staff to serve all eligible consumers, federal regulations mandate that individuals with the most significant disabilities be given priority for services. LRS determines who has the most significant disabilities by using an Order of Selection having five categories ranging from most severe to least severe. An individual's limitations resulting from their disability is considered in tenns of barriers to employment. Using this infonnation, the individual is placed in the appropriate Order of Selection Category. In July of 2017 all five Order of Selection Categories remained closed. This meant LRS served 1,007 individuals from the waiting list. In September 2017, another 1,019 were served from the waiting list. In October of 2017, another 605 were served and in November of 2017, LRS was able to fully open Order of Selection Category I to serve individuals with the most significant disabilities. At this time, 795 were served from the waiting list.

Performance Measures
 LRS, and the other five WIOA core programs, are evaluated for success using six common perfonnance measures.  The measures are Employment rate in the 2nd quarter after exit; Employment rate in the 4°1 quarter after exit; Median earnings; Credential attaimnent; Measureable skills gains; and Effectiveness in serving employers. As LRS has no experience in capturing these perfonnance measures, LRS is on a baseline this year to reasonably determine what our measures should be enacted.
Transition
In Program Year 2017, LRS continued to increase the number of students with disabilities being served as they transition from high school into adulthood to pursue training and employment. LRS is mandated to expended 15% of the federal grant to make available five core Pre-Employment Transition Services, including job exploration counseling, work-based  learning experiences,  counseling on opportunities for enrollment in comprehensive transition or post-secondary educational programs, workplace readiness training, and instruction in  self-advocacy.  During this time period,  LRS provided  services to 5,197 students with disabilities.
In addition, LRS currently has active Third Party Cooperative Agreements (TPCA) with local or state education providers to provide Pre-ETS and is continuing to pursue additional TPCA's with local and state education providers.
LRS continues to work with the Louisiana Department of Education to provide Pre-ETS to students in the Jobs for America Graduates (JAG) program. LRS is currently providing those services in 37 parishes, one (1) virtual school (University View Academy), one(]) community college (South Louisiana Community College in Lafayette) and three (3) Jefferson Parish Chamber sites. LRS provided Pre-ETS to more than 500 JAG participants in Program Year 2017. LRS is in the process of updating the State-Level Agreement between Louisiana Department of Education and Louisiana Workforce Commission/Office of Workforce Development/LRS.
Customized Employment
LRS developed a pilot program in Program Year 2017 to begin offering Customized Employment as an option to assist individuals in obtaining employment. Customized Employment creates employment through negotiation of job duties with the employer instead of using the traditional approach of matching a person to an existing job. Customized Employment assumes the employability of every job candidate and considers an employer's umnet needs along with the skills and abilities of the individual seeking employment. It is used when more intensive interventions are needed than traditional Supported Employment to identify, obtain, or maintain employment.
Workforce Development
VR is actively involved with the 15 Workforce Development Areas (WDAs). LRS is represented on each of the boards and VR staff members have a presence in the AJCs. In addition, the agency's Rehabilitation Employment Development Specialists (REDS) serve as the liaison for the centers within their regions and provide services to individuals who participate in the VR program.
Building relationships with employers and with the business community continues to be a premise in the Employment Initiative as our connections with the Human Resource personnel and hiring managers ultimately connect the agency's consumers with viable jobs. The Rehabilitation Employment Development Specialists and the Statewide Employment Coordinator continue to be active in the community by participating in various events such as Career fairs throughout the state, and by speaking at

various re-entry events and conferences such as the LWC Summit. Our Employment Specialists also
continue to be active in the WDB One Stop committee Meetings, Mayor's Commission on Disability and Re-entry Meetings as well as attending the Business Service meetings within the AJCs that are held in
.	.
vanous regions.
In 2017-18, LRS began to work closely with the Louisiana Department.of Culture, Recreation and Tourism, and LRS was able to assist that department in filling some of their seasonal positions - some of which lead to permanent employment positions. Additionally, Louisiana set a goal to serve as a model employer for business by a commitment to improved hiring, recruitment, and retention of people with disabilities through an Executive Order signed by Governor John Bel Edwards. The important initiative has been launched and will serve to enhance the diversity of the public workforce, lead the business community, and highlight the State's position as a leader in the protection of civil rights for individuals with disabilities. The Statewide Employment Coordinator has been meeting individually with the State Department Human Resource Managers to establish connections, rapport and obtain guidance on how job announcements will be announced/posted. This will serve to facilitate the process by which people get interviewed and increase their employment in Louisiana State Government.
LRS continues efforts to assist SST and SSDI beneficiaries to meet employment goals. LRS continues to collaborate with Disability Employment Initiative, Work Pay$, as well as other state agencies and stakeholders to ensure Ticket-to-Work  is  successful  in Louisiana.  LRS maintains  a statewide 1- 800 ticket hotline number for individuals interested in learning more about theirtickets and how VR would be able to assist them. In Program Year 2017, LRS received $1,488,446 from the Social Security Administration's reimbursement program.
Rehabilitation Engineering/Assistive Technology
Assistive Technology (AT) services include computer assessment, activities-of-daily-living evaluations, augmentative and alternative communication (AAC), home and job- modification evaluations,
adaptive driving and transportation evaluations, educational technology assessments, vehicle modification evaluations, and assessments for seating and wheeled mobility systems. LRS provides these on a fee-for-services basis, and utilizes professionals and technical experts on a regional basis.
These AT/RT providers are vetted and determined to be certified by national professional and federal standards by the AT Program Administ rator, and the Community Rehabilitation Program (CRP) Administrator. When verified, these are listed in the LRS Technical Guidance and Assistance Manual (TGAM) and in the AWARE™ case management system for the LRS Counselor to utilize for specialized assessments, evaluations and AT acquisition as elements of the consumer's Individualized Plan for Employment (IPE).
LRS also continues to maintain its relationship with the Louisiana Assistive Technology Network (LATAN) with an expanded program, funded by the Rehabilitation Services Administration, to provide statewide demonstration-learning,lending, and purchasing assistance of assistive technology. LATAN provides a device-rental service for LRS consumers to use assistive technology devices ona trial basis. LATAN is now an approved vendor in the TGAM described above.
Randolph-Sheppard Business Enterprise Program
This program provides employment opportunities for the blind by establishing and maintaining Business Enterprise Facilities. The program currently operates 69 facilities throughout the state, employing 180 individuals.

A healthy vending event was conducted on April 6, 2018 at the Claiborne building in downtown Baton Rouge. This event was planned with the assistance of the National Automatic Merchandising Association, (NAMA) to promote Fit Pick, which is a healthier snack alternative for snacks that are commonly sold in vending machines. To support the event, NAMA assisted in securing donations of 17 cases of products from six manufacturers. Coca Cola also participated in the event by providing samples of Dasani water and four new flavors of Diet Coke. The vending operator also agreed to promote the event on his Facebook page and to customers of the building' s cafeteria.
Items meeting the Fit Pick guidelines for healthy vending are promoted with signage on the vending machines, as well as with a green "pusher" located next to the item in the vending machine.
Given the success of this event, we are encouraging our other managers, especially those in downtown Baton Rouge, to adopt the practice of offering healthy vending options which meet Fit Pick guidelines.
Independent Living Part B Program
Independent Living Centers located across the state provide core services: infonnation and referral; IL skills training; peer counseling; individual and systems advocacy; and services that facilitate transition from nursing homes and other institutions to the community. More than 3,297 individuals received independent living services at an average cost of $102.91 per consumer during Program Year 2017.
Independent Living Older Blind Program
The three rehabilitation centers contracting with the Independent Living Older Blind (ILOB) program provided services such as orientation and mobility training; low vision evaluations and handheld and electronic magnifiers; training in performing activities of daily living, etc., to a total of 4,395 individuals 55 years of age or older and having significant visual impairments at an average cost of $109.90 per consumer.
Title Ill Wagner Peyser (WP) Services
Louisiana has mandated that all WIOA participants , regardless of whether they have followed a sequence of services, will be enrolled as participants in WP. In addition, with changes to the WP Program in PY 2017, Louisiana determined that all participants who are referred for population-specific programs such as the RESEA program, a program in partnership with our Department of Children and Family Services, and Rapid Response service recipients will be enrolled as participants and included in WP performance measures. For PY 2017, WP performance measures the LWC met or exceeded three of three measures: Employment 2nd Quarter After Exit (59.1%), Employment 4th Quarter After Exit (59.1%) and Median Earnings 2nd Quarter After Exit ($4,921).

CONTINUOUS QUALITY IMPROVEMENT
Data Validation
The LWD Office of Workforce Development Management Information Systems (MIS) Department is scheduled to conduct quarterly data validation reviews in local offices. This activity, due to a significant reduction in staff, was not conducted each quarter but was conducted at least once in 2017. Desk reviews are done on a continuous basis and when site visits are made, documentation is reviewed. LWC implemented a policy at the end of PY 2017, in the fonn of a MIS Letter of Instruction that requires electronic recordkeeping of participant data.

Customer Satisfaction
Customer satisfaction surveys were conducted by Local Workforce Investment Area throughout the year. The methodology varies between local areas. Many areas had new One-Stop Operators who initially set up their own operations and have subsequently designed surveys for either every customer or those whom received specific services, depending on the area.
In 2017, a consumer satisfaction survey was conducted by the Louisiana Rehabilitation Council (LRC). The LRC conducts a satisfaction survey every three years. The survey was e-mailed to all of Louisiana Rehabilitation Services' consumers actively receiving services or those who had received services during FFY 2016 but their cases had been closed. A total of 5,116 consumers were e-mailed the survey and 391 of those emails were returned undeliverable. Therefore, a total of 4,725 surveys were successfully delivered via e-mail. Of this number, a total of 613 surveys were completed with a 76.51% satisfaction rate. One hundred thirty-three consumers who took the survey requested to be contacted by a LRC member. Four LRC members volunteered to contact those consumers. As a result, two of the consumers who were contacted wished to serve the disability community, completed applications to serve on the Council and were appointed by the Governor to the LRC in SFY 2018.
Economic Publications
The Labor Market Information unit published our STAR jobs portal at www.laworks.net. We also provide UI insurance claims data by week and post for public use. Some analyses performed by this unit lag approximately two years. Some reports were updated for 2017, such as Employment & Wages. The 2018 Louisiana Workforce Information Review included data updated for 2017 (see attached).

ADDITIONAL PROGRAM ACTIVITIES/SUPPORTS
HiRE Continue s to Support
Each year the state's Virtual One Stop System (VOS), HiRE, enhances features for all user types; individuals , employers , providers, and staff that improve the VOS experience. During program year 2017, the agency saw improvements in the area oflook and feel for all user types. Areas of improvement include a responsive web design where screens are resized based on the platform being used (telephone, table, or desktop); progressive and informed registration where an individual must register prior to applying for a job; once minimum registration information is collected, an individual is guided to "what's next" options with single click directing to individual needs; and advanced job search allows for an apprenticeship search and on the job training with descriptions. For employers specifically, some enhancements included the introduction of Internship as a job type in its job-order options; a feature that allows employers to select applicant requirements such as employment history, certifications, and education history when creating a job order; and the ability for employers to share jobs via Facebook, Twitter, or email.
LWC staff saw enhancements that aid case management improvement. Such enhancements included new system alerts such as job orders requesting H2A or H3B certification; the inclusion of contact type when recording case notes; wider range of background information when completing a common intake, improvements to document management; a record of time spent with an individual; and additions to reports, for example Measurable Skill Gains are now accessible, new filters for employment reports, new filters for Trade reports, visual performance summary gauge displays.

A rewrite of the Wagner-Peyser Application has integrated PIRL requirements. Staff members now are able to select from four eligibility types: Registration Only, Wagner-Peyser, JVSG, and MFSW.
Re-employment Services
Required service entry for UI beneficiaries are based on worker profiling through LWC's statistical profiling model. A UI claimant most likely to exhaust benefits should be considered not workforce ready.
LWC's Re-Employment Services and Eligibility Assessment (RESEA) program is a grant-funded program designed to specifically assist UI recipients identified as "most likely" to exhaust benefits and assist them to quickly return to the workforce. RESEA services include orientation to American Job Center (AJC) services, eligibility assessment, provision of LMI, the development and/or update of an individual re-employment plan, and referral to existing WP and WIOA services.
Selected RESEA participants must report to the AJC at specified service points as a requirement of continued eligibility to receive UI benefits. In 2017, RESEA services were provided under the Wagner­ Peyser Program with referral to WIOA for training services. Two service points were provided within three visits including an orientation, provision oflabor market information and career information, information on assessment tools, and development of an Individualized Employment Plan.
WIOA performance outcomes are not generally reported for RESEA participants separate from the existing performance measures. RESEA participation levels, however, were continuously monitored throughout 2017, with regular program management training to increase participation. New hire trainings were conducted regularly, which included training on population management and case management.
File a Claim
When a claimant/jobseeker files a claim, he or she is automatically registered in state's job bank- HiRE; his or her Wagner-Peyser (WP) application is created as appropriate; and he or she is determined monetarily eligible.
Selected
Depending on claim status, claimant/jobseeker is profiled and selected for RESEA participation, and a letter automatically generated and mailed to claimant/jobseeker.
Compliance
The claimant/jobseeker reports to local office to receive re-employment services as mandated; the appropriate service provided and documented accordingly; and any potential disqualifying activity is referred to Adjudication.
The re-employment of UI beneficiaries and the reduction of erroneous payments are high priorities for Louisiana. In PY 2017, we continued re-employment services through a service delivery system combining several initiatives aimed at providing re-employment services at different intervals of a claimant/jobseeker's claim series with a continuum of services. Itcombines several RESEA service points supporting specific programs including Worker Profiling and Re-employment Services (WPRS) (federal and state) and Re-employment and Eligibility Assessment in Louisiana. Each service point has requirements that must be met to maintain monetary eligibility status. Unmet service requirements may result in denial ofUI benefits.

Jobs for Veterans State Grant (JVSG)
The Louisiana Workforce Commission (LWC) is committed to serving veterans, transitioning service members, and their families by providing resources to assist and prepare them toobtain meaningful careers and maximize their employment opportunities. This commitment is an important part of fulfilling our obligation to the men and women who have served our country.
The State drives priority of service in referring veterans and other eligible persons to employment opportunities through a standardized review process. Field leadership receives results of this process quarterly for action when necessary. In addition, Local Veteran Employment Representatives (LVER) are conducting training to the field on veterans' priority of service to the non-veteran staff in the local offices. Regional Priority of Service training was conducted for all American Job Center (AJC) state staff members and follow up training by LVERs will be conducted for every AJC in the state by the end of this fiscal year.
The State continues to provide Intensive Services under the framework of case management for VR&E referrals in accordance with directives. The Disabled Veteran Outreach Program Specialist (DVOP) assigned to St Bernard BCSC coordinates and monitors case assignment as part of the Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) with the Veteran Affairs. The State also has a DVOP in Shreveport, LA that coordinates and monitors case assignment for VR&E clients that have a geographical location near the northern part of the state. These partnerships have resulted in an increase in the number of disabled veterans that we provide intensive services to the SWA, VARO, DVOP ISC, and VETS reviewed the report. There were no "anomalies" reported. The VARO closed cases and provided a date with the
"rehabilitated status." The DVET received and accepted the report.
The State embraced the JVSG refocusing through the efforts of the JVSG staff members and their One­ Stop partners, the state achieved a 99% Intensive Services Rate during PY 17 compared to a goal of 94%. The driving factor behind this success were One Stop staff members conducted initial assessments on incoming Veteran job seekers and only referrals of those identified to have a SBE to a DVOP.
Below is a comparison of the key JVSG metrics between PY16 and PY 17.
Performance Targets for Jobs for Veterans State Grant Funded Services(Source: VETS-200A)

PY 16
 GoalPY16
ActualPY17
Actual
Gain During PYIntenisveSernces Pro1nded to Individuals by DVOP Specialists /T otal Veterans and Eligbi le Persons Served by DVOP Speciailsts in the State (VETS 200A - Line 11, Col. CY(VETS 200A) - Line9, Col. C)
94%
99.7%
99.7%
5.7%Veterans' Entered EmploymentRate (VEER) Weighted (utlizeVPL 06-14, attachment 3)66%49%53%-13%Veterans Employment Retention Rate (VERR) (VETS200A-Line 25, Col. C)81%73%76%-5%Veterans' Average Earnings (VAE) (Six-Months) (VETS 200AL-ine 28, Col. q$17,500$15,293$15,848($1,652)
Among the successful activities of the Veterans Program, the State began operations for its Veteran' s Reentry Program. This program is specifically targeted for supporting an Incarcerated Veterans Reentry Program during the period of January 1, 2018 through December 31, 2018 to assist veterans twelve

months prior to release in an effort to thwart recidivism.
The JVSG staff visited various prison facilities throughout the state to assist returning citizens, instead of the five parishes originally fostered with this program in PY16. The JVSG staff has garnered partnerships by working closely with agencies such as: Louisiana Probation and Parole, Volunteers of America, and the Louisiana Prison Reentry Initiative (LAPRI). The JVSG program has also conducted combined training with these partner organizations in an effort to streamline processes and to understand what each entity can do to assist returning citizens.
The State JVSG program collaborated with the State Apprenticeship program to create on the IT program Apprenti. This program addresses the workforce shortage in the tech industry and identify diverse talent to meet industry needs. The staff traveled throughout the state to partner with the Transition Assistance Programs (TAPS) at each military facility to provide guidance on registering transitioning veterans into the program.

STATEWIDE ACTIVITIES
National Emergency Grants (NEG)
Sector Partnership NEG
On June, 26, 2015 LWC was awarded and received a two-year NEG called LA-19, Sector-Partnership (SP NEG) with a Period of Performance of July 1, 2015, - June 30, 2017. The grant received a no-cost extension, which extended the POP to June 30, 2018. Despite employment growth, USDOL recognized that many states continued to experience a number of smaller dislocation events which impacted long­ term unemployed workers. The state was awarded $1,000,000 to continue improving our demand -driven system to respond quickly to the immediate and long-tenn needs of employers and workers who have been jobless for 27 weeks or more. To support the American economy and provide opportunities for workers, skills that align with the needs of businesses are critical. This grant support job-driven approaches to workforce development through sector partnerships and sector strategies. Services under this NEG will provide assistance to a maximum of 130 eligible dislocated workers, primarily focusing on four groups; 1) long-term unemployed; 2) Unemployment Insurance (UI) claimants; 3) Veterans; and
4) Foreign trained workers within three (3) regions in the northern corridor of the state encompassing 29 parishes. Like the JD NEG, eligible participants under the SP NEG will participate in work-based training opportunities including On-the-Job Training (OJT), Apprenticeship, and Customized Training within the following industry sectors: Manufacturing, Health Care, Professional and Technical Services and other demand occupations within targeted regions.
DOL required quarterly cumulative reports of SP NEG from July 1, 2015 - June 30, 2018.
A total of 64 participants have been assisted under this grant. 29 have received Intensive Services; 58 enrolled in training; 19 enrolled in OJT only; 7 received Supportive Services; 66 have exited; and 56 have entered employment at exit of the program. Louisiana expended $569,315 of the awarded funds.
Rapid Response(RR)
Rapid Response (RR) acted upon 79 notifications of a possible layoff occurrence in PY2017. Twenty­ one of those came directly from Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification (WARN) Act notices while the others came from news articles, rumors or other notification. Retail sales accounted for 35% of our layoff notices for the year.

Rapid Response provided intensive services for 33 companies providing 53 distinct services to 1011 individuals affected by a layoff. Services provided to the affected workers included general orientation sessions, resume writing workshops, job search workshops, interviewing skills workshops, and job fairs.
We have also utilized direct company leads where a company in need of workers attends the orientation sessions to inform the affected workers of their openings and set up interviews for the interested parties. In one particular layoff, RR directly assisted 45 workers with improving and updating their resume which resulted in 28 of those assisted to not need to file a UI claim. Services provided directly to the employer included help coordinating with UI for temporary layoff services and mass file submission for separation notices. Rapid Response worked with UI to allow companies with layoffs greater than 50 to allow the company to submit an excel file listing the affected employees instead of having to manually input individual separation notices. This saved the employer time and sped up the UI process for the affected workers.
Rapid Response coordinators work with Industry Sector Coordinators and Business Service Representatives to outreach to targeted companies to showcase services available and build a contact network of prospering businesses that could be used for quick placement of workers affected by a layoff. This coordination has allowed Rapid Response set up direct interaction between hiring employers and available workers. Since Rapid Response coordinators are housed in AJCs around the state, it allows for easy co-enrollment with other programs. When coordinating a RR orientation, staff from UI, AJC and TAA are included in the orientation session. Individuals then have a direct opportunity to ask questions and get more information regarding services provided through the nearest AJC and/or TAA. Rapid Response also assists in gathering information for a Trade petition as well as helps facilitate TAA services with the employer.
When the recently laid-off worker is enrolled in Wagner-Peyser, they are provided an initial common assessment, agreed upon by mandatory partners in the local area.
Registered Apprenticeship
The LWC Apprenticeship Division serves 60 apprenticeship programs that provide employment and training to approximately 3800 registered apprentices across Louisiana. The Governor of Louisiana and Secretary of LWC have expressed an goal to expand Information Technology and Healthcare in Louisiana through reliable career pathways, with special emphasis placed on Registered Apprenticeship (RA) as a platform to attain these goals. This new emphasis on RA has allowed LWC to implement the development of a dedicated team to increase the number of RA programs, industry involvement, and participation of underrepresented populations. The resignation of the Director of Apprenticeship in early 2016 resulted in the absence of a pennanent director for the majority of the year, which prompted necessary adjustments. Currently, the Apprenticeship Division consists of a new Director of Apprenticeship, two Apprenticeship Training Representatives (ATRs), an Outreach Specialist, and an Administrative Assistant, with plans to add additional positions to assist in this endeavor. This team will work to build a stronger relationship with program sponsors, and enhance the presence of Registered Apprenticeship within the state.
LWC was awarded the Registered Apprenticeship Expansion Grant Continuation Funding in June of 2018. This funding will be used for personnel costs, as well as several pilot programs to give seed funding to new and existing programs. There is also funding for peer-to-peer exchanges, partner engagement, and training that will provide the tools necessary to develop a knowledgeable and dependable RA staff.

Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA)
Louisiana statewide TAA activity for PY 2017 had 10 active petitions affecting 1,700 workers. There were five new petitions filed for certification this program year, however, four out of the five were certified after July 18, 2017.
Between July 2017, and June 2018, the TAA training program served 80 participants. Twelve participants successfully completed TAA training during Program year 2017 and earned credentials, including:
1. HYAC certification;
2. B.S. in Social Work;
3. A.S. in General Studies;
4. CDL Certification, and;
5. Home/Building Inspection License/Infield Training.
Currently , eight of the 12 recent graduates have reported that they are gainfully employed. The professions trained for and employed include:
1. State Social Worker;
2. Truck Drivers;
3. Louisiana Home/Building Inspector, and;
4. Heating & Air Conditioning Mechanic.

Incumbent Worker Training Program (IWTP)
IW TP/ SBET Fiscal Year Performa nce Summary
Fiscal
!Year$ Award of Participants frained of Employers RepresentedII of Jobs RetainedII of Jobs CreatedAverage Wage ncrease*2017-2018$22,607,440.8256,03469928,6121,26412.29%2016-2017$19,882,355.0245,76467222,5531,36012.17%*	Average among those workers who actually received an increase in pay


FY 17-18 = IWTP - 126 contracts for $18,868,882; SBET 1558 awards for $3,738,558.82. FY 16-17 = IWTP - 110 contracts for $16,316,755; SBET 1639 awards for $3,565,600.02.
Success Stories
Sapa Extrusions LLC in Delhi had 70 people approved to go through Confined Space
Certification. Since they started the course and seen the initial safety benefits, the company has decided to double the number of trainees to go through this course.
Field staff submitted, reviewed and on recommended to the review team in 1.5 weeks $3.7 million in applications, when only $18K was currently submitted.
Since inception (FY 1998-1999), LWC has approved 2559 IWTP contracts for $573,669,612.09. Based

on actual performance, there have been 3,672 employers represented and 774,726 trainees with an average cost per participant of $541.45.
Since inception (FY 2003-2004), we have approved 19,622 Awards for $41,903,941.95. Based on actual perfonnance, there have been 6,935 employers and 37,296 trainees with an average cost per participant of $737.84.
Work Opportunity Tax Credit (WOTC)
Through the Work Opportunity Tax Credit program, employers are given an incentive to hire individuals with barriers to employment. Employers receive federal tax credits for employing veterans; ex-felons (early release and work release); vocational rehabilitation participants or individuals currently receiving or who have recently received public assistance, such as SNAP or TANF; designated community residents; and long-term unemployed residents. With submission of minimal paperwork and supporting documents, the LWC certifies that the employer is eligible to receive between $1,200 and
$9,600 in tax credits. In 2017, the LWC implemented a web-based application submission process,
eliminating a backlog of 150,000 applications. This tax incentive is for new hires only, and is designed for long-term employment by requiring retention of new hires to get full tax credits.
State of Louisiana WOTC program

Fiscal Year!Applications ReceivedCertificates Issued01883,65633,20112017108 ,61267,0651201675,51433,1921201573 ,53619,759*Program is funded until December 31, 2019
*March 2018, modified system per USDOL rule changes.

Im ple menting Sector Strategies
Louisiana launched 5 Industry Sector Partnerships across the 8 regions of the state. Two more regions are in the planning phase of launching new partnerships.
Region 1 and 3 - The Certified Ut ility Line Worker Program
The Center for Energy Workforce Development (CEWD) and the Louisiana Energy Workers Consortium (LEWC) identified a need for workforce development for the energy industry of 551 line workers statewide. In response to the identified need, Louisiana launched an initiative for connecting Workforce and Economic Development.
The goal of the cert ified utility line worker program is to:
• To provide Certified Line Worker credentials in Certified Line Worker, NCCER Core, NCCER Power Line, OSHA 10, and CPR First Aid Basic Plus.
• To provide CDL credentials in CDL Class A and Comprehensive Safety Analysis (CSA).
• In partnership with the local workforce development areas, to provide transitional activities and wrap-around student support services, including case management.
• To provide monthly progress reports that includes WIOA participants, a brief description of activities and associated expenditures.

Since its 2017 launch, the program has experienced positive outcomes.




























Reg ion2 - IT
Region 2 launched a sector partnership for the IT sector. As meetings progressed, the employer decided that establishing and IT apprenticeship would be the best way to handle workforce needs.
Apprenti - IT Apprenticeship Program
The Louisiana State Apprenticeship Council approved the Apprenti IT apprenticeship program on Tuesday, November 27, 2018.
To date LWC has built relationships with five employer partners who have committed to join the first cohort: General Informatics, Trace Security, EATEL Business, Transformyx, and Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Louisiana.
Our first role will be a Cybersecurity Analyst, and we plan to hire about 10 apprentices for this initial cohort. Apprenti sources candidates regardless of educational background or experience, and actively recruits women, minorities and veterans. Community partnerships have been established with entities

such as Employ BR, Baton Rouge Area Chamber, the EBR Career Center, United Way, the BR North Economic Development District, The Futures Fund, and state and local legislators, to help us source quality candidates. Our efforts, coupled with Apprenti's national name recognition, has attracted more than 300 candidates that have registered on the Apprenti portal, successfully completed the online assessment, and expressed interest in the Louisiana program. LWC has evaluated about 85 of those candidates and have over 30 in-person interviews scheduled.
LANtec will be the training provider for the first cohort, which is scheduled to begin January 7, 2019. LANtec has significant experience working with LWC and the Incumbent Worker Training Program, and already has certified curriculum and instructors needed for this initial role. The classroom-training period will be 10 weeks for this occupational track. The apprentice will then be placed with an employer for one year of paid on-the-job training.
Region 3 - Healthcare
Region 3 LAT Healthcare Sector Partnership began under the initiative of Louisiana Workforce Commission and through the efforts oflndustry Sector Specialists Cheri Blanchard, and Jacquelyn Craddock. Other support partners include: LAT Workforce Development Board Director Frank Lewis, Region 3 Business & Career Solutions Center Director Lorey Owens, Terrebonne Economic Development Authority- Katherine Gilbert-Theriot Fletcher Technical - Tandra LeMay, and Terrebonne Parish School Board/Adult Ed- Marilyn Schwartz.
The first meeting was held March 8, 2018, with 22 Representatives from a cluster of businesses, small to large in all lines of health care attending.
17 Industry Representatives volunteered to work on Task Force on the following items:
1. Collaboration among agencies/organizations - Sharing patient info across region & organizations for coordination of care. Improve electronic communication. Educating all, providers/patients on c01mnunity resources. Networking. Grant writing.
2. Collaboration for workforce development - Consortium for grants, increased presence in high schools-internships/apprenticeships, Jump Start initiative, improve quality of candidates to industry specs, encourage career paths in needed occupations with a track for advancement, increase regional training limits for LPNs, increase funding assistance to individuals for medical training.
3. Mental health - Providers work together for better outpatient care after in patient. Transparency in available beds. Address drug/behavioral health before it becomes acute.
4. Wellness - Education, schools and community. Engagement with community planning for better access to walking tracks, bike paths, parks, fresh & affordable nutrition.
5. Technology- Telemetry, Telemedicine, patient direct access to care. Platfonns for sharing data across all systems.
6. Regulations - MACRA & MIPs. Improve reimbursement. Transportation/Technology coming together-payer support.
Eventually, committees were condensed into three and proceeded to work on Workforce Development, Mental Health, and Collaboration.
Region 6 - Healthcare
The Central Louisiana Healthcare Sector Partnership was launched to identify opportunities for growth

in the healthcare industry in central Louisiana and to identify and address issues that may hinder this growth. The groups is made up of over 30 healthcare businesses from the area and over a dozen support partners. The group has identified two priority areas:
I . Marketing the healthcare industry
2. Enhancing the talent pipeline

Two workgroups have been fanned to address these areas. Achievements:
1. The marketing group has created a logo for the group to use in its outreach efforts.
2. The Central Louisiana Chamber of Commerce agreed to make healthcare the featured industry sector in their yearly marketing campaign for central Louisiana.
3. The pipeline group has decided to focus its efforts on doubling the number ofregistered nurses produced by the three institutions of higher education in Central Louisiana and is currently formulating plans. The employers have agreed to help the training providers to achieve funding to make this happen.
Region 7 - Manufacturing
The Northwest Louisiana Manufacturing Sector Partnership was launched in November of 2016. These employers decided to concentrate on two goals: (1) Increasing the Flow of Local Talent into Manufacturing Careers and (2) Marketing Modern Manufacturing. This team partnered with the Manufacturer's Manager' s Council and NLEP (North LA Economic Partnership) to pursue these initiatives.
One project they focused on was the promotion & expansion of North Louisiana Manufacturing Week. This past October it produced significant results. For example, Manufacturing Week went from one week to two weeks.
Northwest Louisiana Manufacturing Week Results:
20142018School Systems210Student Participation1501,642Tour Sites733Tours Given868

Region 8 - Healthcare
The Northeast Louisiana Healthcare Sector Partnership was renamed the NELA Healthcare Alliance.
The NELA Healthcare Alliance represents nearly 40 diverse healthcare organizations in Northeast Louisiana. The alliance is comprised of hospitals, long term care facilities, skilled nursing facilities, home health organizations and others who together, in addition to providing critical needed healthcare to community members, provide nearly twenty percent of all jobs in our region. These healthcare organizations have come together in an ongoing network (The Northeast Louisiana Healthcare Alliance)

to tackle the most pressing healthcare issues of this region together, including workforce issues, networking opportunities, and pressing policy topics that warrant a collective action.
Successes
1. Put together a Region 8 Hospital Resource Guide
2. Hosted Legislative Luncheon which directly resulted in 2 pieces of proposed legislation with one that passed (SB478: Provides relative to LPN Licensure- There is no longer a charge to look up LPN License).
3. Enhanced an existing Louisiana Delta Community College CNA education program to address customer service deficiencies defined by healthcare providers in the region. Industry Partners and support partners have also worked together to redesign C.N.A. curriculum to include a Behavioral Health course to address the lack of Behavioral Health Techs in the area. Since the start of the Alliance, 54 classroom hours and 24 clinical hours have been added to the C.N.A. curriculum as a direct response to industry feedback. This additional training is also available in shorter format for existing healthcare staff.
4. C.N.A. Training Opportunities expanded to non-traditional sites. As a result of overwhelming need by industry partners from the Alliance, Louisiana Delta Conununity College (LDCC) created and implemented this training on-site at the facilities rather than the school, at the expense of the facility. (Facilities: Landmark, Fannerville, Deerfield and Guesthouse).
Summary
The striking feature of the activities the LWC has engaged in is their inter-connectedness. None of these efforts has alone achieved performance. LWC, in spite of its challenges, has integrated efforts in industry sectors, apprenticeships, career services, and incumbent worker services in collaboration with community and State partners. We continue to expand partnerships and integration and will continue engagement in partner planning activities and continuous evaluation and quality improvements in WIOA policy implementation.






















Louisiana Workforce Commission Post Office Box 94094
Baton Rouge, LA 70804-9094
Page 26 of 26

11111111   -	-	-	-

--------------


















