 
Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act Annual Report 
 
Program Year 2017 
 
 
 
 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
Michigan’s priorities include key actions necessary to continue Michigan’s reinvention.  In alignment with Governor Snyder’s priorities and those of the Governor’s Talent Investment Board, Michigan’s vision is: 
 
“Cultivating inclusive, efficient workforce connections to provide demand-driven services to  job seekers, customers, and employers to strengthen and improve Michigan’s economy.” 
 
The Governor’s Talent Investment Board works with the Michigan Talent Investment Agency/Workforce Development Agency (TIA/WDA) to meet regulatory responsibilities as prescribed by federal statute and regulation, including the development and updating of comprehensive state performance and accountability measures to assess the effectiveness of the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity  Act (WIOA) Title I core program services to job seekers, customers, and employers. 
 
This report is an assessment of performance outcomes for workforce investment activities involving  
six performance accountability indicators relating to adults, dislocated workers, and youth. 
 
PROGRAM DESCRIPTIONS – WIOA ADULT AND DISLOCATED WORKER PROGRAMS 
 
The Adult and Dislocated Worker programs, under Title I of the WIOA of 2014, are designed to strengthen and improve our nation’s public workforce system.  The WIOA presents an extraordinary opportunity to improve job and career options for our nation’s workers and job seekers through an integrated, job-driven, public workforce system that links diverse talent to businesses through continuous improvement supported through evaluation, accountability, identification of best practices, and data-driven decision making. 
 
Benchmarks 
Success in accomplishing the purposes of the WIOA at the state, local, and regional levels will be assessed by whether: 
 
• One-Stop centers are recognized as valuable community resources and are known for high-quality, comprehensive services for customers. 

• The core programs and One-Stop centers provide seamless, integrated customer service. 

• Program performance, labor market and related data driven policy and strategic decisions. 

• Youth programs reconnect out-of-school youth to education and jobs. 

• Job seekers access quality career services either online or in a One-Stop center. 

• One-Stop centers facilitate access to high-quality, innovative education and training. 

• Services to businesses are robust and effective, meeting business workforce needs across the business lifecycle. 


 
These benchmarks, as measured by the WIOA performance measures, serve as indicators to track progress toward meeting the federal and state goals and vision for the workforce system.  The performance accountability system is used by the State to assess the effectiveness of the state and local areas in achieving continuous improvement of workforce investment activities to optimize the return on investment of the WIOA funds.  
  
Services 
Program services are provided through the State’s One-Stop Career Centers/Michigan Works! Agencies (MWAs).  Services available under the WIOA for adults and dislocated workers include: 
 
• Basic career services available to anyone who comes into the One-Stop center.  Services include, but are not limited to, general and program information, outreach, intake and orientation, basic assessments and information, and meaningful assistance in filing for unemployment compensation. 

• Individualized career services include, but are not limited to, comprehensive and specialized assessments, development of an individual employment plan, individualized or group counseling, career planning/case management, and short-term pre-vocational services. 

• Training services to those who qualify include work-based training or occupational training activities.  For occupational training activities, participants use an “individual training account” to select an appropriate training program from a qualified training provider. 

• Business services include, but are not limited to, activities provided to the WIOA participants, such as screening and referrals of qualified participants to job openings employers may have, and activities provided to employers such as the development, convening, or implementation of industry sector partnerships, and working with training providers and businesses to develop  


in-demand training programs to address employer needs.  
 
Target Populations 
Across all titles, the WIOA focuses on and places priority on special populations for the Adult and Dislocated Worker programs, particularly emphasizing serving individuals with barriers to employment. 
 
Individuals with barriers to employment include, but are not limited to: 
 
• Displaced homemakers. 

• Low-income individuals. 

• Individuals with disabilities. 

• Older individuals. 

• Ex-offenders. 

• Youth who are in or have aged out of the foster care system. 

• Long-term unemployed individuals. 

• Other groups determined by the Governor to have barriers to employment. 


 
WIOA Adult Program 
All adults, 18 years of age and older, are eligible for services.  Priority for career and training services must be given to public assistance recipients, other low-income individuals, and individuals who are basic skills deficient.  In addition to unemployed adults, employed adults can also receive services to obtain or retain employment that allows for self-sufficiency.  States and local areas are responsible for establishing procedures for applying the priority and self-sufficiency requirements. 
 
WIOA Dislocated Worker Program A dislocated worker is an individual who:  
 
• Has been terminated or laid-off, or has received a notice of termination or layoff from employment. o Is eligible for or has exhausted unemployment insurance, or 





o Has demonstrated an appropriate attachment to the workforce, but is not eligible for unemployment insurance; and  o Is unlikely to return to a previous industry or occupation. 




• Has been terminated or laid-off, or has received notification of termination or layoff, from employment because of any permanent closure of, or any substantial layoff at a plant, facility, or enterprise, or  o Is employed at a facility where the employer has made a general announcement that the facility will close within 180 days. 




• Was self-employed (including employment as a farmer, a rancher, or a fisherman) but is unemployed because of general economic conditions in the community or because of a natural disaster. 

• Is a displaced homemaker who is no longer supported by another family member. 

• Is the spouse of a member of the Armed Forces on active duty and who has experienced a loss of employment as a direct result of relocation to accommodate a permanent change in duty station of such member, or o Is the spouse of a member of the Armed Forces on active duty and whose family income is significantly reduced because of a deployment, a call or order to active duty pursuant to a provision of law, a permanent change of station, or the service connected death or disability of the member, and 

o Is unemployed or underemployed and is experiencing difficulty in obtaining or upgrading employment. 





 
PROGRAM DESCRIPTION - WIOA YOUTH PROGRAM 
 
Under Title I of the WIOA, funds are provided to states and local workforce investment areas to deliver a comprehensive array of youth workforce investment services, including tutoring, alternative secondary school offerings, paid or unpaid work experiences including internships and job shadowing, occupational skills training, education offered concurrently with and in the same context as workforce preparation activities, leadership development opportunities, supportive services, adult mentoring, follow-up services, comprehensive guidance and counseling, financial literacy education, entrepreneurial skills training, labor market information services, such as career awareness, career counseling, and career exploration services; and, activities that help youth prepare for, and transition to, post-secondary education and training. 
 
Eligible youth must be low-income, in-school youth (age 14-21) or out-of-school (age 16-24), and have one or more of the following barriers to employment:  
 
• Is deficient in basic literacy skills. 

• Requires additional assistance to enter or complete an educational program to secure or hold employment. 

• Is a school dropout. 

• Is homeless, a runaway, or in foster care. 

• Is pregnant or parenting. 

• Is an offender. 

• Is receiving or is eligible to receive a free or reduced-price lunch. 


• Is an individual, including a youth with a disability, who requires additional assistance to complete an educational program or to secure and hold employment. 

• Is living in a high-poverty area. 


 
Youth are eligible to receive services to prepare them for post-secondary educational and employment opportunities, attain educational and/or skills training credentials, and to secure employment. 
 
PROGRAM OUTCOMES SUMMARY 
 
Michigan exceeded all 14 negotiated performance measures for Program Year (PY) 2017.  The following charts show Michigan’s WIOA Title I and Title III actual performance results for PY 2017.  A description of each performance measure and analysis of Michigan’s results are included. 
 
 
Table provides a summary of Michigan's average indicator score for WIOA Title 1 Adult, Dislocated Worker and Youth Programs and the WIOA Title III Wagner-Peyser Program.
 
Employment Rate Second Quarter After Exit 
The Employment Rate Second Quarter After Exit is defined as the percentage of participants who are in unsubsidized employment during the second quarter after exit from the program.  For Title I Youth, the indicator is the percentage of participants in education or training activities, or in unsubsidized employment, during the second quarter after exit. 
 
The bar graph below indicates Michigan’s negotiated rate for Employment Rate Second Quarter After Exit for each of the Title I and III programs.  The line graph indicates Michigan’s actual performance.  Michigan exceeded each of the negotiated rates – WIOA Adult by 6 percent, WIOA Dislocated Worker by 8 percent, WIOA Youth by 18 percent, and Wagner-Peyser by 9 percent. 
 
Bar Graph - Employment Rate Second Quarter After Exit.  
Employment Rate Fourth Quarter After Exit 
The Employment Rate Fourth Quarter After Exit is defined as the percentage of participants who are in unsubsidized employment during the fourth quarter after exit from the program.  For Title I Youth, the indicator is the percentage of participants in education or training activities, or in unsubsidized employment, during the fourth quarter after exit. 
 
The bar graph below indicates Michigan’s negotiated rate for Employment Rate Fourth Quarter After Exit for each of the Title I and III programs.  The line graph indicates Michigan’s actual performance.  Michigan exceeded each of the negotiated rates – WIOA Adult by 10 percent, WIOA Dislocated Worker by 9 percent, WIOA Youth by 12 percent, and Wagner-Peyser by 10 percent.  For PY 2017, only two quarters of exiters are included in the Employment Rate Fourth Quarter After Exit measure. 
 
Bar Graph - Employment Rate Fourth Quarter After Exit
 
Median Earnings 
Median Earnings is the value of wages reported in the second quarter after the exit quarter that is the mid-point between the value of the lowest wage and the value of the highest wage.  The Median Earnings performance measure was a baseline measure for the Youth program for PY 2017, and no target was set. 
 
The bar graph below indicates Michigan’s negotiated rate for Median Earnings Second Quarter After Exit for each of the Title I and III programs.  The line graph indicates Michigan’s actual performance.  Michigan exceeded each of the negotiated rates – WIOA Adult by 13 percent, WIOA Dislocated Worker by 20 percent, and Wagner-Peyser by 19 percent.  Median Earnings is a baseline indicator of performance for WIOA Youth, and no target was set for PY 2017. 
 
 
Bar graph depicts the median earnings for the second quarter after exit.
 
Credential Attainment Rate 
The Credential Attainment Rate is the percentage of those participants enrolled in an education or training program (excluding those in On-the-Job Training [OJT] and customized training) who attain a recognized post-secondary credential or a secondary school diploma, or its recognized equivalent, during participation in or within four quarters after exit from the program.  A participant who has attained a secondary school diploma, or its recognized equivalent, is included in the percentage of participants who have attained a secondary school diploma, or its recognized equivalent, only if the participant also is employed within four quarters after exit or is enrolled in an education or training program leading to a recognized post-secondary credential within 365 days of exit from the program. 
 
The bar graph below indicates Michigan’s negotiated rate for Credential Attainment for each of the  
Title I programs.  The line graph indicates Michigan’s actual performance.  Michigan exceeded each of the negotiated rates – WIOA Adult by 25 percent, WIOA Dislocated Worker by 27 percent, and  
WIOA Youth by 14 percent.  For PY 2017, only two quarters of exiters are included in the Credential Attainment Rate measure. 
 
 
Bar Graph - Credential Attainment Rate
 
Measurable Skill Gains (MSG) 
The MSG is the percentage of program participants who, during a program year, are in an education or training program that leads to a recognized post-secondary credential or employment, and who are achieving measurable progress toward such a credential or employment.    
Only one of the following MSGs is needed per program year to result in a positive for the MSG performance measure. 
 
• Educational Functioning Level Gain - Documented achievement of at least one educational functioning level of a participant who is receiving instruction below the post-secondary education level. 

• Secondary Diploma/Equivalent - Documented attainment of a secondary school diploma, or its recognized equivalent.  Exit is not required to count and can include participants at all levels. 

• Progression Toward Milestone - Satisfactory or better progress report, towards established milestones, such as completion of OJT or completion of one year of an apprenticeship program or similar milestones, from an employer or training provider. 

• Secondary/Post-Secondary Transcript - Secondary or post-secondary transcript or report card for a sufficient number of credit hours that shows a participant is meeting the State unit's academic standards. 

• Skills Progression - Successful passage of an exam that is required for a particular occupation or progress in attaining technical or occupational skills as evidenced by trade-related benchmarks such as knowledge-based exams. 


 
The MSG is a baseline indicator of performance for the WIOA Adult, Dislocated Worker, and Youth, and no target was set for PY 2017.  Major changes were made to Michigan’s One-Stop Management Information System (OSMIS) during the program year to assist local areas in identifying which participants were subject to the MSG measure, and to allow them to enter data for MSG Attainments.  The State also provided four all-day training sessions to train MWAs how to track MSGs and enter them into the OSMIS. 
 
 
Bar Graph - Measurable Skills Gains
 
PROGRAM YEAR 2017 COST EFFECTIVENESS ANALYSIS 
 
Cost effectiveness analysis calculates the impact a program achieves relative to the cost incurred, or conversely the cost required to achieve a given impact.  The value of cost effectiveness analysis is twofold:  first, its ability to summarize a program in terms of an illustrative ratio of effects to costs, and second, the ability to use this common measure to compare multiple programs evaluated in different contexts and in different years.  Cost effectiveness analysis is useful and informative as it maximizes the comparability of elements within different programs without straying from a correct and complete representation of the costs and effectiveness of each program as it was evaluated. 
 
Michigan has used three methods to measure the cost effectiveness of its workforce programs – Return on Investment, Cost per Dollar Earned, and Cost by Category of Service. 
 
Return on Investment (ROI) 
The ROI is calculated by dividing the return, or gain, by the investment, or expenditures.  The gain is calculated by subtracting the expenditures from the wages earned by program exiters 
(ROI = [Wages Earned – Expenditures] / Expenditures).  This ratio will tell the amount of wages gained per dollar invested, thus revealing the efficiency of the investment.  The ROI is most useful when comparing current performance to past performance, as opposed to comparing programs.  It can be used to determine trends of increasing or decreasing efficiency. 
 
 
Bar graph depicts the Return on Investment for each of the WIOA Title I Adult, Dislocated Worker, and Youth Programs.
 
 
Bar graph depicts the Return on Investment for the Title III Wagner-Peyser Program.
 
As this is the first narrative report under the WIOA, the ROI analysis will serve as a baseline for future reports to identify trends in efficiency.  As demonstrated in the charts above, the volume of participants in a program has a significant impact on the ROI.  For example, the Title I WIOA Adult program had 4,372 exiters in PY 2017 compared to 131,948 exiters from the Title III Wagner-Peyser program.  This means that over 127,000 more participants have the potential to contribute to the “Wages Earned by Exiters” for Wagner-Peyser than the WIOA Adult. 
 
  
Cost Effectiveness by Program and Performance Measure 
The following table displays the cost effectiveness by program and performance measure for the  
WIOA Adult, Dislocated Worker, and Youth programs.  This analysis demonstrates the cost per participant, exiter, or positive outcome if all program expenditures were applied to that single data element.  This is not a true “Cost per” analysis since all program expenditures are not dedicated to that single data element; however, it utilizes a consistent calculation methodology to allow for comparison across programs.  The cost effectiveness by program and performance measure allows us to analyze the volume of positive outcomes in comparison to the funds expended, while the WIOA Performance Measures track the percentage of positive outcomes in comparison to the population receiving services. 
 
In PY 2017, the Cost per Employed in the Fourth Quarter After Exit, the Cost per Credential Rate, and the Cost per Measurable Skill Gain are inflated.  The number of participants employed in the fourth quarter after exit and the number of participants who received a credential only includes two quarters of exiters.  A full four quarters of exiters will not be available for these measures until PY 2018.  We expect these two “Cost per” measures to be halved in PY 2018 when there is a higher volume of positive outcomes included in the calculation.  The MSG indicator created the need for system changes and process changes.  Local MWAs are learning to track and document the MSG.  We expect the “Cost per” measures to drop over the next several program years as these new processes are implemented. 
 
 
Table depicts a Program Cost Analysis per performance measure under the three WIOA Title I programs.
 
Cost Per Dollar Earned 
The Cost per Dollar Earned is the inverse of the ROI.  It calculates the investment required by the workforce system to result in one dollar of wages earned by a participant that exits the program.  Cost per Dollar Earned is calculated by dividing the expenditures by the wages earned by exiters.  Many factors can contribute to a lower Cost per Dollar Earned.  It may indicate a program’s efficiency in placing individuals in employment.  It could also indicate effectiveness in placing individuals in higher wage positions.  This measurement will be used to identify trends over several program years. 
 
 
Bar graph depicts the Title I Cost per Dollar Earned for WIOA Adult, Dislocated Worker, and Youth programs.
 
Cost by Category of Service 
The following three charts compare the cost of providing different levels of service to program participants.  The categories of service referenced in this analysis are Career Services and Training Services for WIOA Adult and Dislocated Worker programs.  The WIOA Youth program categorizes services as Occupational Skills Training or Services other than Occupational Skills Training. 
 
For the WIOA Adult program, it is assumed that all participants included in the analysis received Career Services (Basic or Individualized), while a smaller number of participants received Training Services.  The Career Service Expenditures ($18,064,811) are divided by the total number of participants (14,016) to calculate the Cost per Participant for Career Services.  The Career Service Expenditures ($18,064,811) are divided by the total number of exiters (4,372) to calculate the Cost per Exiter for Career Services. 
 
The Training Service Expenditures ($17,328,243) are divided by the number of participants that received training services, and the result is added to the Cost per Participant for Career Services to calculate the Cost per Participant for Training Services.  The Training Service Expenditures ($17,328,243) are divided by the number of exiters that received training services, and the result is added to the Cost per Exiter for Career Services to calculate the Cost per Exiter for Training Services. 
 
 
Bar graph depicts cost by category of services for the WIOA Title I Adult Program.
 
The WIOA Dislocated Worker – Cost by Category of Service chart utilizes the same calculations as the WIOA Adult – Cost by Category of Service chart.  The Career Service Expenditures ($12,643,890) are divided by the total number of participants (3,775) to calculate the Cost per Participant for Career Services.  The Career Service Expenditures ($12,643,890) are divided by the total number of exiters (1,982) to calculate the Cost per Exiter for Career Services. 
 
The Training Service Expenditures ($4,831,210) are divided by the number of participants that received training services, and the result is added to the Cost per Participant for Career Services to calculate the Cost per Participant for Training Services.  The Training Service Expenditures ($4,831,210) are divided by the number of exiters that received training services, and the result is added to the Cost per Exiter for Career Services to calculate the Cost per Exiter for Training Services. 
 
 
Bar graph depicts cost by category of services for the WIOA Title I Dislocated Worker Program.
 
For the WIOA Youth program, it is assumed that all participants included in the analysis received Services other than Occupational Skills Training, and a subset of those participants received Occupational Skills Training.  The expenditures for Services other than Occupational Skills Training ($20,556,946) are divided by the total number of participants (6,676) to calculate the Cost per Participant for Services other than Occupational Skills Training.  The expenditures for Services other than Occupational Skills Training ($20,556,946) are divided by the total number of exiters 
(2,072) to calculate the Cost per Exiter for Services other than Occupational Skills Training.  The Occupational Skills Training Expenditures ($743,004) are divided by the number of participants that received Occupational Skills Training, and the result is added to the Cost per Participant for Services other than Occupational Skills Training to calculate the Cost per Participant for Occupational Skills Training.  The Occupational Skills Training Expenditures ($743,004) are divided by the number of exiters that received Occupational Skills Training, and the result is added to the Cost per Exiter for Services other than Occupational Skills Training to calculate the Cost per Exiter for Occupational Skills Training. 
 
 
Bar graph depicts cost by category of services for the WIOA Title I Youth Program.
 
CATEGORY OF SERVICE IMPACT 
 
There are three levels of services provided to participants in the WIOA Adult and Dislocated Worker programs – Basic Career Services, Individualized Career Services, and Training Services.  A participant is reported in the highest category of service they received.  For example, an individual who received Basic Career Services and Individualized Career Services would be reported in the Individualized Career Services category, since Individualized Career Services are more intense than Basic Career Services.  Similarly, an individual who received Basic Career Services, Individualized Career Services, and Training Services would be reported in the Training Services category. 
 
There are two levels of services provided to participants in the WIOA Youth program – Services Other than Occupational Skills Training and Occupational Skills Training.  Occupational Skills Training is considered the more intense service, so participants that receive both categories of services are reported in the Occupational Skills Training category. 
 
The following series of charts demonstrates the impact that the category of service provided has on the participants’ outcomes for each of the WIOA Title I programs.  The Employment and Measurable Skill Gains charts utilize stacked bar graphs to show the number of participants included in the numerator and denominator for each of the measures.  They also utilize a solid line graph to show the performance level (percent of positive outcomes) for each category of service, and a dotted line graph to show the total performance level for the measure (all categories of service combined).  The Median Earnings charts utilize bar graphs to show the Median Earnings 
for participants who received each category of service, and a dotted line graph to show the total performance level for the measure (all categories of service combined). 
 
WIOA Adult 
The chart below demonstrates the Employment Rate Second Quarter After Exit is significantly higher when participants receive more intense services.  Participants who received Individualized Career Services were eight percent more likely to be employed in the second quarter after exit than participants who only received Basic Career Services.  Participants who received Training Services were an additional nine percent more likely to be employed during the second quarter after exit. 
 
 
Bar graph depicts second quarter employment by category of service for the WIOA Title I Adult Program.
 
The chart for Employment Rate Fourth Quarter After Exit shows similar gains as participants receive more intense services. 
 
 
Bar graph depicts fourth quarter employment by category of service for the WIOA Title I Adult Program.
The chart for Median Earnings for WIOA Adults shows that wages for participants who received Basic Career Services and participants who received Individualized Career Services were comparatively close.  However, Median Earnings for participants who received Training Services were over $2,300 more than the median wages of participants that only received Career  
Services – Basic or Individualized. 
 
 
Bar graph depicts Median Earnings by Category of Service for the WIOA Title I Adult Program.
 
The sample size of participants that have achieved an MSG is small, so the following chart does not provide a clear picture of how the measure is impacted by the category of service. 
 
 
Bar graph depicts Measurable Skills Gains by Category of Service for the WIOA Title I Adult Program.
 
WIOA Dislocated Worker 
The chart below demonstrates that in PY 2017, the category of service had little impact on the Employment Rate Second Quarter After Exit for the WIOA Dislocated Worker program.  The percent of participants employed decreased slightly as additional services were provided. 
 
 
Bar graph depicts Second Quarter Employment by Category of Service for WIOA Title I Dislocated Worker program.
 
Similarly, the Employment Rate Fourth Quarter After Exit percentage decreased as participants were provided more intensive services.  Participants who received Training Services were  
five percent less likely to be employed in the fourth quarter after exit than those who only received Basic Career Services.  This could be attributed to the thought that dislocated workers with more marketable skills require less intense services to return to the workforce. 
 
 
Bar graph depicts fourth quarter Employment by Category of Service for WIOA Title I Dislocated Worker Program.
 
The chart below shows less variation between the Median Earnings for participants in the WIOA Dislocated Worker program than what was observed in the WIOA Adult program.  It also 
demonstrates that dislocated workers are more likely to earn higher wages than WIOA Adult program participants. 
 
 
Bar graph depicts Median Earnings by Category of Service for the WIOA Title 1 Dislocated Worker Program.
 
The sample size of participants that have achieved an MSG is small, so the following chart does not provide a clear picture of how the measure is impacted by the category of service. 
 
 
Bar graph depicts Measurable Skills Gains by Category of Service for the WIOA Dislocated Worker Program.
 
WIOA Youth 
The chart below demonstrates the Employment Rate Second Quarter After Exit is significantly higher when youth participants receive Occupational Skills Training.  Participants who received Occupational Skills Training were 11.9 percent more likely to be employed in the second quarter after exit than participants who received services Other than Occupational Skills Training. 
 
 
Bar graph depicts the Second Quarter Employment by Category of Service for the WIOA Title I Youth program.
 
The chart below shows a considerable drop (9.9 percent) in Employment Rate Fourth Quarter After Exit compared to the second quarter after exit.  This measure will be monitored in future program years to determine whether this observation is consistent from year to year. 
 
 
Bar graph depicts the Fourth Quarter Employment by Category of Service for the WIOA Title I Youth program.
 
The chart for Median Earnings for the WIOA Youth shows that the median earnings for participants who received Occupational Skills Training were over $1,600 more than the median wages of participants that did not receive Occupational Skills Training. 
 
 
Bar graph depicts Median Earnings by Category of Service for the WIOA Title I Youth program.
 
The sample size of participants that have achieved an MSG is small, so the following chart does not provide a clear picture of how the measure is impacted by the category of service. 
 
 
Bar graph depicts the Measurable Skills Gains Category of Service for the WIOA Title I Youth program.
 
GOVERNOR’S RESERVE FUNDED ACTIVITIES 
 
During PY 2017, Michigan provided Governor’s Reserve funding to support three significant projects, ranging from assistance with growing local talent to meet the demand for skilled and general labor, providing direct assistance to an employer needing talent development assistance to employ over 4,000 workers, to expanding a FastStart program to meet local hiring demand. 
 
With many high-profile projects coming to the city of Detroit, including the construction of the Gordie Howe International Bridge over the next few years, the TIA/WDA and the Michigan 
Department of Transportation are committed to working in partnership with the City, the MWA (Detroit Employment Solutions Corporation), educators, and labor organizations to fill the need for skilled and general labor; and in the process, assist Detroit residents, especially those who face significant barriers, with access to long-term employment.  Services will be provided to approximately 1,000 participants. 
 
Funds will be used to support: 
 
• Occupational, classroom, and/or work-based learning, including apprenticeships. 

• Job readiness (soft/employability skills) training. 

• Basic skills (literacy/numeracy) training. 

• Wrap-around support services. 

• Job placement assistance. 


 
Amazon, the world’s third largest retailer, announced that they would be opening three major fulfillment centers in Southeast Michigan within the next 18 months and employ over  
4,000 workers.  In agreement with the TIA/WDA, the Southeast Michigan Community Alliance Michigan Works! has been designated as the single point of contact for Amazon talent development assistance. 
 
Funds will be used to support: 
 
• The development/implementation of Amazon application assistance events. 

• Increased staff time related to planning and coverage for all Amazon on-site hiring events, including at venues outside of Michigan Works! service centers. 

• The coordination of training for Michigan Works! service center staff spread across Southeast Michigan. 

• Extended service hours for hiring and application assistance events. 

• Ongoing assistance for the project as each fulfillment center prepares to open. 


 
The FastStart Just-in-Time Training (“FastStart”) model was created in 2008 via a partnership with Great Lakes Bay Michigan Works! and Delta College to meet local hiring demand for Chemical Process Operators.  Since then, FastStart has expanded to other occupations, including solar manufacturing, battery manufacturing, advanced manufacturing, business and customer service, diesel technician, and Emergency Medical Technician. 
 
Funding is being provided to Great Lakes Bay Michigan Works! to further expand the program.  The MWA meets with employers in a specific industry to determine unmet hiring need and then strategizes on potential training agencies.  The MWA then brings in the selected training agency to establish the training and to assure the training is listed on Michigan Training Connect (Michigan’s Eligible Training Provider List) as an eligible training provider.  Generally, employment rates are around 90 percent for individuals participating in FastStart training, as employers are involved in identifying their hiring needs, the timing of the training, training curriculum, and entry/exit requirements. 
STATUS OF STATE EVALUATION ACTIVITIES 
 
Training programs are a critical component of Michigan’s workforce development system.  For individuals seeking employment, training programs offer a pathway to learning new skills that can increase the probability of finding a job and increasing earnings.  For employers, these programs present a source of talent for growing in-demand jobs that may be difficult to fill.  For state government, training represents an important tool not only for serving job seekers and employers, but also reducing unemployment and poverty. 
 
Throughout Michigan’s recovery in the wake of the Great Recession, tens of thousands of Michiganders have completed training programs, yet until now the effectiveness of these programs has remained largely unknown.  To examine the crucial question of training program effectiveness, as well as meet requirements under the WIOA, the TIA/WDA and the Department of Technology, Management & Budget (DTMB) Bureau of Labor Market Information and Strategic Initiatives partnered to undertake a pilot evaluation of workforce development training programs.  The draft evaluation report presents the results of that partnership and for the first time, provides stakeholders with key insights into whether training programs are helping workers find jobs. 
 
The study, currently in draft, evaluated employment outcomes for two years (eight quarters) after training completion.  Preliminary findings show that trainees are better off having had training than they would be without it, as compared to their non-trainee counterparts.  An examination of employment outcomes for a period of two years after training completion shows that trainees demonstrate superior outcomes compared to those who did not receive training in terms of both earnings and levels of employment.  Secondly, the results demonstrate that training is cost effective using the wage premium benchmark.  On the average, the increased earnings of trainees far exceed program costs.  Within one year of training completion, wages are double the cost of training, and within two years, are almost triple the cost of training. 
 
Once the report is finalized and published, it will be located on the Michigan Bureau of Labor Market Information and Strategic Initiatives web page. 
 
STATE’S APPROACH TO CUSTOMER SATISFACTION 
 
Job Seekers 
Continuous improvement of services to both employers and job seekers is crucial to Michigan’s workforce productivity and competitiveness.  As part of the certification process for Michigan Works! service centers, Michigan requires that local workforce development boards and chief elected officials have a process in place to evaluate One-Stop service centers for the purposes of monitoring customer service levels and implementation of service improvement to employers and job seekers.  At the local level, there are different methodologies used to gather information about customer satisfaction, including: 
 
• Surveys completed by participants at the end of each program or workshop and during on-the-job training and work experience site reviews. 

• On-line customer satisfaction surveys available on resource room computers that individuals can complete at any time. 

• Informal real-time feedback is utilized at all service centers, based on employees’ daily interactions with customers and business service members interactions with employers.  This feedback is used to identify new opportunities or improvements to the way training, recruiting, and networking processes are completed. 

• Program participants and service center customers are provided with a customer satisfaction survey.  Information is then analyzed and shared with management and administrative staff at least quarterly. 

• Employers participating in local job fairs or hiring events are given surveys to gauge their satisfaction with the event or services being provided by Michigan Works!  These surveys provide greater insight on employers’ needs. 

• MWAs may also utilize specialized tracking systems, such as G*Stars, which allows individuals to complete surveys about their experiences. 


 
Based on feedback and information received from the surveys, potential actions taken toward continuous improvement include: 
 
• Identifying ways to improve service delivery or addressing customer service training for staff based on trends or patterns identified in the surveys. 

• Feedback received following workshops helps guide changes to curriculum for future workshops and/or the establishment of new workshops where individuals have identified that services are lacking or based on employer feedback as to whether potential job seekers need additional assistance to meet their hiring needs. 

• Tracking customer traffic has resulted in decisions about service center location and staffing, including expanding hours, additional staffing during busy hours, service center layout, etc. 


 
Based on feedback from the MWAs, voluntary response rates to surveys are low as individuals whose needs have been met are unlikely to respond to surveys as opposed to individuals who are upset or individuals who received exemplary services. 
 
At the state level, Michigan surveys individuals about their experiences when utilizing our labor exchange system (Pure Michigan Talent Connect [PMTC]) or the State’s Eligible Training Provider List (Michigan Training Connect (MiTC)) websites.  Survey questions include information about browsing patterns, the general look and feel of the site, ease of navigation, quality of the information provided, and overall site performance.  While PMTC is geared toward all job seekers (WIOA and non-WIOA), MiTC provides information about the WIOA-funded training programs.  Survey trends for MiTC indicate that customer satisfaction ratings for the site are above-average. 
 
Effectiveness in Serving Employers 
Michigan has chosen to report the expected level of performance for the Effectiveness in Serving Employers Indicator Pilot by utilizing the following approaches: 
 
1. Retention with the same employer, measured by the percentage of participants who exit and are employed in the second and fourth quarters after exit. 

2. Repeat business customers, based on the percentage of repeat employers using services within the three previous years. 

3. Employer penetration rate based on the percentage of employers using services out of all employers in the State. 


WIOA WAIVERS 
 
On January 2, 2018, the following waivers were approved through June 30, 2020, by the United States Department of Labor (USDOL). 
 
WIOA Youth Program 
Michigan received approval for the following: 
 
• A waiver of the requirement to expend 75 percent of the WIOA Title I Youth State formula funding on the Out-of-School Youth population. 

• A waiver of the requirement that local WIOA Title I Youth funding must meet the 75 percent minimum expenditure requirement. 

• A waiver of the requirement to expend 75 percent of the WIOA Title I Statewide Activities funding on the Out-of-School population. 


 
Status 
Each local area is meeting or exceeding their Appropriation Years 2016 and 2017 Out-of-School expenditure rates based on the waiver.  The State is exceeding target Out-of-School expenditure rates – Appropriation Year 2016 at 80 percent and Appropriation Year 2017 at 73 percent (based on 71 percent of Appropriation Year 2017 funds expended). 
 
Monitoring 
The State tracks these expenditures quarterly and annually in the Management of Awards to Recipients System.  Should any area be identified as at-risk following a quarterly review, technical assistance is available and immediately provided. 
 
Benefits 
The waiver allows local One-Stop centers to focus additional funding on proactive services to targeted, at-risk In-School youth, such as dropout prevention.  Multiple One-Stop centers will now be able to put specialists back into schools/districts that have high populations of at-risk youth. 
 
Challenges 
Contracts were already in place based on the 75 percent Out-of-School minimum when the waiver was granted.  Changes to program planning and contracts take time to implement, so the effects of the waiver will also take time to evaluate. 
 
State and Local Area Outcomes 
During PY 2017, Michigan exceeded its Out-of-School Youth performance outcomes. 
 
Eligible Training Provider List 
Michigan was approved for a waiver of the obligation of eligible training providers to collect performance data on all students in a training program at the WIOA Section 116(d)(4)(A) and  
122, and 20 Code of Federal Regulation 677.230(4) and (5). 
 
Status 
Training and Employment Guidance Letter 3-18, issued on August 31, 2018, stipulates that second and fourth quarter performance outcomes are not required retroactively, and will not be expected for the Annual Quarterly Reports in October 2020 and 2021, respectively.  As of October 12, 2018, MiTC (Michigan’s eligible training provider list) has implemented all required data elements.  System integration between Michigan’s OSMIS and MiTC has been created to provide the OSMIS the provider and program information needed to aid the One-Stop centers in assigning approved training activities and to provide performance data needed to create the ETA 9171 reports required each year, effective October 1, 2019. 
 
The State is also in the signature process of a Data Sharing Agreement between the TIA/WDA, the Michigan Center for Educational Performance and Information (CEPI), and the DTMB Labor Market Information and Strategic Initiatives to incorporate data sharing at the student level to be able to provide wage outcomes and student program counts for submitting public post-secondary institutions to CEPI before 2020 and 2021 deadlines set by the USDOL. 
 
Additional connections are being created between Michigan’s Licensing and Regulatory Affairs Agency public post-secondary licensing database to aid in the MiTC verification process. 
 
Monitoring 
The State monitors MiTC applications to ensure they meet requirements for placement on MiTC.  Additionally, accurate and reliable performance data will be obtained once all data systems are in place. 
 
Benefits 
The wavier will allow the State time to implement reporting requirements for all students via automatic matches with other data sources (not just the WIOA participants), while removing the burden on training providers.  Additionally, accurate performance data can be used by our stakeholders to make informed decisions about training and education, policy, and programming to improve Michigan’s return on investment. 
 
Challenges 
There remains a need to identify options and funding to provide proprietary schools listed on MiTC a method by which to submit identifying student information to allow us to provide wage outcome information.  Michigan is developing a portal for use by proprietary schools and other training providers not included in CEPI reporting, so that information on all students can be obtained as required for the WIOA performance reporting.  The portal will be operational by June 2019. 
 
State and Local Area Outcomes 
While performance information on eligible training providers is not required for PY 2018 because of the waiver, system integration will ensure that accurate and reliable performance data is being obtained. 
 
APPENDIX 1:  SUMMARY OF LOCAL PERFORMANCE 
 
WIOA Adult 
The chart below displays the local performance outcomes for each of the sixteen Michigan Works! Agencies. 
 
 
Table displays the local WIOA Adult Program performance outcomes for each of the sixteen Michigan Works! Agencies,
WIOA Dislocated Worker 
The chart below displays the local performance outcomes for each of the sixteen Michigan Works! Agencies. 
 
 
The chart displays the local WIOA Dislocated Worker Program performance outcomes for each of the sixteen Michigan Works! Agencies.
WIOA Youth 
The chart below displays the local performance outcomes for each of the sixteen Michigan Works! Agencies. 
 
 
The chart displays the local WIOA Youth Program performance outcomes for each of the sixteen Michigan Works! Agencies.
 
Wagner-Peyser 
The chart below displays the local performance outcomes for each of the sixteen Michigan Works! Agencies. 
 
 
The chart displays the local WIOA Wagner-Peyser Program performance outcomes for each of the sixteen Michigan Works! Agencies.
 
APPENDIX II:  SUCCESS STORIES 
 
Name:  Keith Sterly 
Employer:  Otsego County Sherriff’s Department 
Program:  WIOA Adult 
 
Keith was working a part-time marine patrol job, as well as other part-time jobs to make ends meet.  He wanted to enroll in the Police Academy but wasn’t sure how he would be able to afford tuition and pay his bills if he was in the academy full-time.  Keith stated: “It was a very stressful time for me figuring out if it would all work out for me the way I needed it to.” 
 
After speaking with Michigan Works!, Keith was able to qualify for tuition assistance for the academy, so he didn’t have to take out student loans on top of his already large list of bills.  Michigan Works! was also able to help Keith pay for gas to and from the Kirtland Police Academy in Roscommon, as well as new tires for his truck, and help with purchasing the required uniforms and boots.   
(At 6’9”, Keith needed sizes that had to be special ordered). 
 
While in the academy, Keith learned all aspects of the criminal justice field and what the career would entail from hands-on motor vehicle code to first-aid and firearms.  He is currently employed as a  
full-time deputy with the Otsego County Sherriff’s Department. 
 
“Personally, I enjoyed the hands-on learning aspects and excelled in defensive tactics, firearms, and emergency vehicle operations,” states Keith.  Keith received the award for Top Defensive Tactics Recruit, a leadership award, and received the MCOLES (Michigan Commission on Law Enforcement Standards) award for the top recruit in the Kirtland Police Academy. 
 
Keith continues, “Without the help I received from Michigan Works!, I could not have been able to go to this academy.  I would have probably waited until next year, and it would have cost me a lot more money and stress trying to figure it all out.  My Michigan Works! advisor was there, readily available for any questions I had, and helped me tremendously throughout the entire academy.” 
 
Name:  Melissa Stevenson 
Employer:  Coveris Americas 
Program:  WIOA Dislocated Worker 
 
Melissa worked at Schawk Industries as a customer services representative for 18 years, but in  
2017, was permanently laid-off with no notice.  While Melissa has a strong background in graphic design and customer service, she was very concerned about her barriers of age, being employed in a weak industry, and the availability of opportunities. 
 
During November 2017, Michigan Works! helped Melissa with job search support, resume review and revamping, coaching, connection to partner resources, mock interviews, On-the-Job Training, and assistance with receiving certification for Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) benefits. 
 
In her own words, Melissa tells her story, “I began working with Michigan Works! after being downsized from a position on October 17, 2017.  I had worked for my employer at the time for  
18 years and was released from my duties along with 17 other employees.  Never being unemployed, it was very upsetting, and I wasn’t sure how to take the next step.  I attempted to file for Unemployment the next day and found out that my identity had been compromised previously the year before and benefits had been paid out.  So not only did I have my being unemployed to deal with now, I had to fix the identity theft.  I wasn’t sure if I wanted to stay in my field or maybe consider something different, I felt pretty lost-despair is the only word that comes to mind.” 
I was put in touch with Michigan Works! through the advice of another coworker who had also been downsized.  I finally felt someone was there to help me and that I had possible opportunities to look at from training, resume assistance, and was able to contact my case manager within my industry.  I had not had a resume in the last 30 years, so this was my next assignment; and with suggestions from my case manager, I completed my resume.  Michigan Works! helped with distributing my resume and calling potential employers that might have a potential opening.  I applied to Coveris, and Michigan Works! also contacted a Human Resources contact at Coveris. 
 
I started the interview process with Coveris in November 2017, and after five interviews, I started my new position on January 23, 2018.  The employment package I was offered at Coveris was far better than what I had been dismissed from and a far better company to work for.  I am enjoying my new career with Coveris and am grateful for the guidance Michigan Works! provided.” 
 
Melissa is now employed full-time as a customer support representative, making $60,000 per year with benefits.  She is also registered for benefits under TAA if she so chooses to use them in the future. 
 
Name:  Justin Tough 
Employer:  Jobs for Michigan’s Graduates – Presque Isle Academy 
Program: WIOA In-School Youth 
 
The Jobs for Michigan’s Graduates (JMG) program, based on the Jobs for America’s Graduates model, was established to help at-risk youth graduate from high school and be better prepared for the future.  The JMG graduates have a 94 percent success rate, 14 percent higher than the Michigan average.  Upon completion of the program, 83 percent were employed, and 57 percent were enrolled in post-secondary education. 
 
Justin Tough was behind in credits when his WIOA case manager met him at Presque Isle Academy.  He didn’t have transportation to school and work.  He faced turmoil in his past and in his home life, and he had no plans for after graduation. 
 
The case manager worked with Justin to overcome his barriers and graduate from Presque Isle Academy.  He successfully and consistently held a job throughout high school.  Through JMG, Justin participated in four trips to Lansing, Michigan’s State Capitol, including one for Legislative Day, one for Leadership Day, and two times for the career development conference.  While in the program, Justin made great progress by showing leadership in creating the school garden, successfully communicating with officials during the JMG’s Legislative day, has held successful employment for three years, completed his course work early in his senior year and then spent time volunteering at the academy.  As of Fall 2018, Justin completed all necessary steps to receive financial aid and is currently enrolled at Alpena Community College in the Auto Body Repair Program. 
 
Justin says, “Through the years that I have been a part of this program, JMG has helped me get up on my feet and prepare myself for a better future.” 
 
Name:  Tina Holey 
Employer:  Werner Enterprises 
Program: WIOA Out-of-School Youth 
 
After battling with a disability for her entire life, Tina wanted a life change after hundreds of surgeries.  Tina was born with Treacher Collins Syndrome, a condition that affects the development of bones and other tissues of the face, and in Tina’s case, also made it hard for her to eat and breathe.  After graduation from high school and struggling with numerous uphill battles, Tina decided it was time for a 
change and came to Michigan Works! in search of training so she could transition off Social Security and become employed as a truck driver. 
 
Tina stayed dedicated and focused on one goal, which was obtaining her Commercial Driver’s License (CDL-A).  After completing her 160 hours training through the local community college, Tina was in search of employment immediately and wasted no time searching.  After a short time, she had employment as a CDL truck driver.  To date, Tina has over six months’ worth of time with her current employer and has had two pay increases since she started.  She is now making $16.62 per hour and travelling the road with her dog. 
 
Tina states “I like showing people [that] no matter what others say I can’t do, there’s always something I can do.” 
 
Employer:  Arauco North America 
Program:  WIOA Business Services along with Skills Upgrade and Incumbent Worker Training Services 
 
Arauco North America has begun construction of a new state-of-the art particleboard manufacturing facility located in Northern Michigan; with the expected opening to occur later in the third quarter of 2018.  Once in full operation, the Arauco Particleboard Mill in Grayling will be the largest facility of its kind in the world, bringing a significant number of jobs (over 200) with competitive wages and benefits to Northern Michigan. 
 
Through their efforts, Michigan Works! assists Arauco in delivering tangible benefits to Arauco and to their employees that have already been hired or will be hired for the facility.  Funding sources and services provided include a significant amount of State-funded Skilled Trades Training Funds to train nearly 200 new employees, the WIOA Incumbent Worker Training funds to support upgraded skills training for current staff, and assistance with marketing and outreach to a large talent pool to participate in several job fairs. 
 
While Arauco recently ran into minor setbacks when several candidates originally selected for hire changed their minds, a contributing factor was that their current employers offered highly-competitive wages to maintain their staff levels; wages which nine months ago were not as competitive prior to Arauco’s hiring. 

