Background image
WIOA Missouri 
Annual Report

2017

Image of workers
TABLE OF CONTENTS

Director of the Division of Workforce Development
Governor Michael L. Parson’s Set-Aside Funding 
Missouri Registered Apprenticeship Program (MORAP)
Missouri Job Center Hosts Networking for Those with Autism
Agricultural Apprenticeships
Talent for Tomorrow
Missouri Job Center Does Outreach through Project Community Connect
EMPOWER Staff Development Program
MOPerforms
JobStat Provides Diverse Expertise for Analysis and Evaluation of Data Reported 
Workforce Data Quality Initiative (WDQI)
Rural Outreach Strengthens Ties
Successes through Braiding and Partnering
Eldon Career Center and Lake Career & Technical Center Help Youth with Registered Apprenticeships
Missouri Services Navigator
Rapid Response: Employment Transition Team
Dislocated Worker Grants
Charleston, MO Welcomes New Adult Education & Literacy Center
Effectiveness in Serving Employers 
Effectiveness in Serving Job Seekers
Circumstances for Missouri Adult Credential Measure in WIOA
Circumstances for Youth Measure in WIOA 
Performance for Program Year 2017
Show-Me State Numbers
Equal Opportunity Accomplishments
Missouri Equal Opportunity Demographics for Program Year 2017

	
1
2
2
3
4
5
5
6
6
6
7
7
8
8
9
10
11
11
12
13
14
14
15
16
17

Director Mardy Leathers
MARDY LEATHERS
Director
Division of Workforce Development

Mardy Leathers was appointed to serve as the Director of the Missouri Division of Workforce Development in October 2017. Since his appointment, he has served an integral role in shaping novel and innovative models to expand apprenticeship and work-based learning programs in Missouri, played a key role in the state’s Talent for Tomorrow and Best in Midwest initia­tives, and led the launch of an apprenticeship partnership with the United Kingdom.
 
Prior to becoming the Director of Workforce Development, he most recently served as Executive Director of the Center for Workforce Development at East Central College in Union, Missouri.  There, he played a key role in developing the state­wide Community College Workforce Development Network and oversaw the college’s business and industry training efforts, community education, healthcare career certification and WIOA programs. Additionally, Leathers served as Crawford County, Missouri Clerk.
 
Mardy holds a Bachelor of Science from Southeast Missouri State University, a Master of Business Administration from Wil­liam Woods University, and is a Doctor of Management candidate with Webster University.

1

WIOA MISSOURI 2017 ANNUAL REPORT

GOVERNOR MICHAEL L. PARSON'S SET-ASIDE FUNDING

Governor Parson has directed the WIOA set-aside funding to various programs across the state with a strong emphasis on apprenticeships. While a portion of this funding is used for staff salaries, the larger part of this funding is being used in pilot programs, equal opportunity activities, upgrades to the MOJobs case management system, and expanding the registered apprenticeship program. 
As described in greater detail below, the Governor applied a portion of set-aside funds to the pilot program that prepared justice-involved individuals with training and employment while incarcerated. With the partnership of a local farm, Missouri Department of Corrections (MODOC), the local food bank and the Division of Workforce Development (DWD), several people received certifications that enabled employment after release with a second cohort due to graduate in the near future. 
The registered apprenticeship program expanded its reach across the state with several new employer partners and apprenticeship areas using these funds. Apprenticeships have been a huge boon to the workforce development system, engaging more employers and encouraging job seekers toward higher growth and higher wage occupations.  

MISSOURI REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM (MORAP)

Missouri’s focus on apprenticeships has improved career pathways for job seekers and attracted employers to our sector focused effort. Apprenticeship programs have helped to create clearer career pathways for job seekers and better talent pipelines for employers. We will continue to pursue an aggressive expansion of apprenticeships to meet the needs of Missouri job seekers and employers. 
In December 2017, DWD issued a call for innovative proposals for registered apprenticeships. This phase of investment and expansion into MORAP was supported with the award of $3.8 million of the Governor’s WIOA Discretionary set-aside funds, allowing MORAP to engage current and new partners in building new talent pipelines for high demand occupations. The resulting strategic investment is supporting sustainable growth for businesses and the Missouri workforce system.
In 2018, DWD was awarded Continuation Funding through the ApprenticeshipUSA State Expansion Grant. The focus for these funds was to build infrastructure, provide support and spur continued growth of the program. The support of leadership in Missouri has been instrumental in the continued success of the initiative. 
Throughout this process, DWD has emphasized partner engagement, which has been critical to the program’s success. These partners all play a role in meeting workforce demands in Missouri. According to the Missouri Economic Research and Information Center (MERIC), “Missouri is projected to have more than 880,000 total job openings between 2014 and 2024. This includes openings created by new job growth as well as those created through the need for replacement workers for jobs vacated through retirement, turnover or transferring to another occupation.” Of these openings, almost half are projected to be middle-skill positions.1 
Many partners and employers have leveraged additional funding for Registered
Apprenticeship projects. All community colleges in the state of Missouri are developing Registered Apprenticeship projects. The Division of Workforce Development has also engaged State Technical College of Missouri and Missouri State University to support the delivery and development of Registered Apprenticeships.
The Missouri Department of Elementary and Secondary Education (DESE) has also been involved with creating effective campaigns to market Registered Apprenticeships to administrators, parents and students. Through this partnership, DESE has set an aggressive goal to have over half of their Career Technical Education students participating in Registered Apprenticeships. DWD has funded projects that directly engage local school districts.
As discussed further below, justice-involved individuals are participating in Registered Apprenticeships through MODOC prior to release from incarceration. By participating in training and apprenticeships that lead to jobs, recidivism is reduced while addressing the needs of employers participating in the program. DWD and MODOC have also partnered to address MODOC’s own workforce needs through Registered Apprenticeships.
 
1 Missouri Economic Research and Information Center (MERIC), Long-Term Occupational Projections, Occupational Employment and Wage Survey, and U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Product funded by the U.S. Employment and Training Administration, Workforce Information Grant.

Woman working on an engine
2

“Missouri is projected to have more than 880,000 total job openings between 2014 and 2024. This includes openings created by new job growth as well as those created through the need for replacement workers for jobs vacated through retirement, turnover or transferring to another occupation.”

MISSOURI JOB CENTER HOSTS NETWORKING FOR THOSE WITH AUTISM

The Missouri Job Center located in Springfield, hosted a networking event for several local employers interested in hiring people on the autism spectrum. 
Preceding the event were several lunch-and-learn workshops held at the Job Center where employers received information about the best learning and working environments for persons with autism. The employers were very interested in getting information that would allow them to incorporate individuals on the autism spectrum into the workplace. 
At the networking event, participating companies had representatives available to talk with interested individuals about the skills and knowledge needed by local businesses to fill positions.
Partner agencies included Arc of the Ozarks, Missouri Department of Elementary and Secondary Education (DESE) – Vocational Rehabilitation Division, Easter Seals Midwest, Missouri State University, Preferred Family Healthcare, and the Missouri Department of Mental Health (DMH). 

3

AGRICULTURAL APPRENTICESHIPS
AMANZI FARMS PARTICIPATES IN WIOA REENTRY 
EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES

In January of 2018, Missouri’s Division of Workforce Development entered into an agreement with the Workforce Development Board of Southeast Missouri to fund the Charleston Correctional Center Horticultural Registered Apprenticeship Project. The project was developed in cooperation with MODOC, DWD, Workforce Development Board of Southeast Missouri, and the Mid-America Food Hub (MAFH) and Training Center, LLC. MAFH provided a mobile classroom capable of training 12 individuals at a time and a certified instructor to the Charleston Correctional Center. Since the start of this program in March of 2018, two cohorts of inmates have entered the Registered Horticultural Apprenticeship program.
In June of 2018, nine inmates graduated by completing the classroom component of the apprenticeship where they received training on the bath to becoming horticultural crop specialists and earned certificates for OSHA 10, Post-Harvest Food Handling, Food Safety Modernization, and Soil Fertility. During this time they also used what they were learning in the classroom to start a produce garden on correctional center property with seeds donated by the Southeast Missouri Food Bank. The food bank provided storage and distribution to local food pantries for the produce grown by the apprentices. 
Amanzi Farms, located in Sikeston, Missouri, manages the next phase of the registered apprenticeship program through a work release program. The apprentices work 32 to 40 hours per week as paid hands and, upon their release, Amanzi Farms has agreed to offer employment to those individuals who plan to remain in the Southeast region. CJ Henry, Controller for Amanzi Farms, made this comment after the first week, “The amount of work we got accomplished this week made such a difference for our company and we are very grateful to all the guys.”
This Horticulture Registered Apprenticeship Program is an example of an opportunity to partner with Missouri’s correctional institutions to reduce recidivism and meet Missouri’s growing workforce needs in agriculture. Mardy Leathers, DWD Director stated that he is pleased to invest WIOA Discretionary Funding in this innovative training opportunity that will prepare justice-involved individuals to enter the labor force upon release. Plans are being made to replicate this program at the Boonville Correctional Center next year as part of Reentry Employment Opportunities provided by WIOA.
DWD was one of four states selected for the U.S. Department of Labor’s Effectiveness in Serving Employers pilot project. Missouri staff were informed that the state was selected because of the expectation that diligence and integrity would guide Missouri results. The pilot project was used to collaborate with states to develop newly required WIOA measures as they develop, test, and demonstrate the ability to collect the data, incorporate the collection into a reporting structure to analyze the meaning of these new measures. States were given the option by USDOL of selecting two of three proposed outcome measures.
The two performance indicators selected by Missouri and three of the other four states were: 
•	
The Repeat Business Services to Employers Rate

•	
The Employer Market Penetration Rate


Missouri successfully deployed new data collection systems during Program Year 17 and preliminary results are in. Early proxy data from Program Year 15, used for the pilot, indicated that there were 19,645 employers receiving services and 6,054 of them received two or more services over the last three years; a repeat business services rate of 30.82%.  
Based on final outcomes, the repeat percentage grew in Program Year 17, by serving a smaller employer set (4,674) but a repeat services rate to 2,441 employers, or 52.2%. In market penetration, the workforce development services in Titles I and III, impacted 207,431 or about 8.1%. These results exceeded early proxy data which were 194,247 establishments at a rate of 4.3%. These results appear to be commendable in capturing and reporting the data and should be goals for growth over time. 
The information in customer satisfaction surveys indicates that the current workforce system in Missouri is highly regarded by business owners in the state. As more information is gathered, we will be able to focus more exactly on the needs of our employers and the reach of our workforce development system.
During Program Year 2017, we utilized Survey Monkey as well as paper surveys to collect all customer satisfaction responses. Uniform Business Services Survey postcards were distributed to the state’s 14 WDB Regions and distributed by Business Service Teams. A State-level Business Services Survey Coordinator serves to monitor the returned surveys as well as to return individual surveys daily and to provide monthly & quarterly summary reports to each of the Regional Business Service Teams. Specialized reports, i.e. Annual Regional Business Services Satisfaction Reports, are periodically created to meet reporting needs and to help emphasize the overall value of the Statewide Business Customer Services Survey Initiative.
Statewide, Missouri businesses returned (376) surveys in the 2nd/3rd/4th quarters of Program Year 17-18. For calendar year 2018 through November 30th, Missouri businesses have returned (652) surveys. The state leaves it to the regions to monitor their survey return rates with the goal of achieving a 10% return rate. The general practice of issuing a business services survey to every employer who receives a service is encouraged. The state does not require regions to report their survey return rate. 
The satisfaction levels of employers statewide have been reasonably exceptional across all regions. Three regions have realized a 100% of “nothing less than satisfied” (Satisfied or Very Satisfied) rating. Every region has received a Satisfied or Very Satisfied rating of 90% or better! We believe the personalized delivery of services by our Regional Business Teams goes a long way toward meeting the expectations of our business customers and can be generalized accordingly because of this consistent rating across all 14 regions.

Video of South East Correctional Center's Horticulture Apprenticeship Graduation

Man on a tractor
Group for the first graduation of horticulture apprentices
Men working in the garden
Interior of mobile classroom
4

TALENT FOR TOMORROW

DED Director Rob Dixon and Higher Education Director Zora Mulligan
As part of our efforts to improve and clarify career pathways, engage employers, and implement sector strategies, the State of Missouri launched “Talent for Tomorrow,” a deep dive into our regional labor markets. Talent for Tomorrow will fundamentally reset Missouri’s approach to meeting the state’s workforce needs across K-12, higher education, and into the labor market.
 
A partnership between the Hawthorn Foundation, Missouri Department of Economic Development (DED) and the Missouri Department of Higher Education (DHE), Talent for Tomorrow provided a detailed assessment of the current workforce and projected future workforce needs. As part of the state programs supported by discretionary spending, the final report included an assessment of the current workforce and how well it aligns with employer needs, deep dives into target economic sectors, economic scenario analysis to help build a workforce system that can adapt as the economy evolves, identification of pilot projects, and recommendations for an overall workforce strategy. 
The initiative was guided by a task force of thought leaders from business and industry, education, trade, the public workforce system, state and federal government, and the Missouri Legislature. With knowledge of our key industries in hand, we can better direct job seekers toward long-term gainful employment and away from public assistance. This meets the state’s planned goals of building career pathways while working with employers to meet the planned sector strategy efforts.

Best in Midwest Logo
Link to Final Labor Market Needs Analysis

MISSOURI JOB CENTER DOES OUTREACH THROUGH 
PROJECT COMMUNITY CONNECT

At an annual event held on the campus of the University of Central Missouri in Warrensburg, Missouri, people from across the area attended Project Community Connect to receive a wide range of services from free haircuts to vision screening. A project that is supported by local partnering agencies and service providers, the Job Center participates in order to reach a population that is often overlooked as a source of talented people. 
Job Center staff helped with resume writing, provided advice on professional dress, and gave out information on youth and adult employment opportunities, adult education and literacy programs, and GED enrollment. The staff of the Job Center worked on this community outreach project with other core partners who work alongside them every day as well as companies from the local area. Participating in Project Community Connect each year is one example of taking the concept of one-stop job centers to the people.

5

EMPOWER STAFF DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM

“In addition to creating a standardized corporate training program for Missouri’s professional workforce staff, this is also how we recognize and reward the work our staff is doing.”

The Missouri Division of Workforce Development took a strategic approach to staff development and recognition by investing in training for all staff in a new competency-based program – EMPOWER. 
The staff from Central Office, Job Centers, and others who work with employers and partners across the state to serve Missouri’s public workforce system have begun to receive in-depth training on WIOA, customer service, job development, and more. EMPOWER will help all Workforce Development staff to better align their work with WIOA partners, local workforce development boards, the state board and others serving the workforce system by providing staff with proficiency and expertise in technical and functional areas of workforce development. 
EMPOWER is a multi-year, multi-tiered training but the focus this year has been on getting all field staff, regardless of their current job duties, trained in baseline service delivery, data input and customer service for job seekers, the underemployed and businesses. DWD Director Mardy Leathers explains, “In addition to creating a standardized corporate training program for Missouri’s professional workforce staff, this is also how we recognize and reward the work our staff is doing.” EMPOWER is designed to be a layered approach with multiple tiers and tracks wherein everyone who has completed the baseline training can then advance through additional specialized tiers for continuous improvement and growth. 

MOPERFORMS

DWD Central Office uses a custom software tool, MoPerforms, for performance analytics. This tool provides the aggregation of all variables used in the PIRL to generate required reports on the WIOA Measures. 
MoPerforms can be configured for cross tabulation and analysis of any Participant Individual Record Layout (PIRL) variables to create management reports as decision support for both state aggregate and each local region’s data. Preliminary reports are used to verify and validate observations in the data. Rosters are another tool available in MoPerforms which are utilized by the Regional Jobstat work group and DWD Central Office. Rosters provide details on individual records that are coming up in each quarter for performance measures, allowing staff to see in advance who is successful and what individuals they can contact in order to add credential or supplemental documentation to the case management system.

JOBSTAT PROVIDES DIVERSE EXPERTISE 						FOR ANALYSIS & EVALUATION 									OF DATA REPORTED   

JobStat is a service delivery and management model used in Missouri to ensure constant monitoring of the performance outcomes, assessment of the measures and how they are implemented, and how they may be impacted. As a result of the analytic capacity of MoPerforms, and the staff capacity of the JobStat model, Missouri conducts spot checks, selected data validation and ad hoc evaluations for business decision making based on the data.
The JobStat model deploys two trained experts in each of the fourteen workforce areas across the state to use MoPerforms. These resources not only are the first to identify opportunities for adjustments in performance management, but they are also available to engage the state Central Office when needs for data analysis and ad hoc queries for program assessment are called for. 
 
 

6

WORKFORCE DATA QUALITY INITIATIVE (WDQI)

As required by WIOA, Missouri has been working on integrating data across state agencies so that state and local performance staff can identify co-enrollment impacts and outcomes, improvement opportunities and best practices. 
The Workforce Data Quality Initiative (WDQI) Grant from the U.S. Department of Labor has allowed the DWD Planning and Research Unit to enhance its agile data reporting and integration. The objective of WDQI is to share aggregate program data from multiple agencies while ensuring security and confidentiality. 
The resulting Workforce Longitudinal Databases (WLDS), will allow the use of information to evaluate federal or state programs in compliance with all applicable laws and regulations. Partnering with DWD in this grant are Vocational Rehabilitation, Department of Social Services, Department of Corrections, Department of Higher Education, Department of Labor & Industrial Relations and Department of Elementary and Secondary Education. 
Missouri is in the early stages of leading the nation both in matching program outcomes with wages, but also in the emerging partnership with Corrections to assess pre-release and incarceration outcomes based on labor force attachment and earnings for the human resources available within the justice-involved citizenry.
Information derived from WLDS will enable longitudinal analysis and reporting of outcomes on programs that provide training and employment services, giving partners their own data playground to generate reports relevant to their agency. Currently, data elements are being collected to develop a WDQI file record layout. The grant administrator is working with the Office of Administration Information Technology Services Division to obtain software needed to provide the desired federal reporting. Additional reports will be built as requested by WDQI partners.
As more longitudinal data is added to the system, the relationship between education and training programs and provision of other employment services can be analyzed. Connecting data across multiple agencies in order to provide user-friendly information allows consumers to choose training programs and recognize current and future careers in high demand fields based on evidence from the data. 
This improvement in broad, quality information also allows states and local workforce agencies to improve services which will benefit job seekers, workers and the business community. 

RURAL OUTREACH STRENGTHENS TIES

In the fall of 2018, the Springfield Job Center hosted a Rural Outreach Initiative Town Hall to provide local businesses and individuals the opportunity to discuss challenges Greene County may be facing. This gave county elected officials, representatives from local employers and the staff and board members of the Springfield Job Center in the Ozark Region an opportunity to discuss the needs of the local workforce and the businesses that employ many residents of the area. 
Information provided included current employment trends, training and education that can build workforce skills, and ways that employers can develop and retain their incumbent workers. 
Addressing the workforce needs of a community is a large part of what Job Centers across the state do and partnering with local companies and agencies is helping to ensure that Missouri’s workforce is adequately trained and businesses are supported in their success.

Missouri farm
7

SUCCESSES THROUGH BRAIDING AND PARTNERING

There are many examples of successful braiding and partnering for assisting clients. Missouri Vocational Rehabilitation (VR) has utilized the specialized skills of partnering agencies to assist many individuals with disabilities to enter or reenter the workforce. In Missouri, VR is part of the Division of Learning Services in the Department of Elementary and Secondary Education. Partnering with schools across the state is expected, but many clients of VR have been enabled and assisted by other partners of the One-Stop Job Centers. 
One resource that VR provides to One-Stop clients are presentations that teach how to disclose a disability to an employer or potential employer. Resume writing can be difficult for people with disabilities in cases where there are gaps in the employment history. VR counselors have been instructing the workers who teach resume writing to clients how to address this issue. 
VR has also been active in teaching Job Center staff about various disabilities or topics related to disability issues in employment. The cross-training of all partners in the Job Center allows for better services for all job seekers who come in for help.
Multiple examples of braiding funds with other partners has led to repeated success stories. The Department of Mental Health will often step in to continue the support of a client’s employment when Vocational Rehabilitation has completed all of their support activities that lead to a job. This allows VR to accept a new client with the now available funds while DMH provides the funding for the continuation of needed services for the employee. Partnerships with other job service partners also create the pool of services and funds that a VR client may need to achieve job success. 
This could mean, for example, that the client is engaged in on-the-job-training using Out-of-School Youth Funds while VR provides assistive technology and job accommodation assistance. Other cases include VR providing guidance and counseling to assist individuals with entering a career path that is made possible through training funds from the Dislocated Worker Program, which leads to a registered apprenticeship. Utilizing the available funding and support services through the WIOA partners has opened employment opportunities to many individuals. 

Missouri VR logo
PARTNERSHIP BETWEEN ELDON AFFILIATE JOB CENTER AND 			LAKE CAREER & TECHNICAL CENTER 							HELPS YOUTH WITH REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIPS

Four students from Eldon High School were enrolled into apprenticeships, which will lead to good jobs. The Missouri Registered Apprenticeship program helps workers close their skills gaps while earning income. 
These students will benefit from the partnership between the Eldon, Missouri, affiliate Job Center and the Lake Career & Technical Center. Collaboration between the two agencies combine classroom learning with hands-on training, which gives participants the skills and instruction necessary to meet industry needs. 
The U.S. Department of Labor, Office of Apprenticeship coordinated with DWD and DESE to provide students with the apprenticeships. Students receive funding from a grant that provides them with the tools and needed trappings to get the job. 
The goal of Registered Apprenticeships is to get people ready to work in high demand jobs with on-the-job and classroom training that lead to industry-recognized certificates. 

8

MISSOURI SERVICES NAVIGATOR

MO.servicesnavigator.org has been developed by the Missouri WIOA partners in cooperation with Missouri’s state agencies and local Workforce Development Boards with the goal to connect people to the programs and services they need.
A group of Missouri Workforce System Partners, a collection of WIOA core and participating partners, collaborated to create a new online service, Missouri Services Navigator (Mo.servicesnavigator.org). 
The Services Navigator allows you to search for services that are available in each county and targeted specifically to meet customers’ needs. The concept of providing available resources to the people of the state in an easily searchable format was built on one of the foundational goals of WIOA: Agencies working together to provide better service to our customers.  Information is loaded into the system by partner agencies so that the information will be available to all other partners and the citizens of Missouri. 
The Missouri Department of Social Services funded the project, DESE took the lead and DWD provided information to supplement the content provided by additional partners. The creation of the website was a collaboration of all partners in designing, testing and rolling out the site. Continued improvement to the site will occur through the partners constantly adding resources, making updates to content and reviewing information used by all in this dynamic system of exchanges.
The Missouri Services Navigator is an excellent example of a best practice developed by a committee. One of the first areas of consultation was to create and develop collaborative definitions so that each agency could have a comprehensive understanding of the sometimes unique vocabularies used by partner agencies. 
This was necessary in order to develop and more completely understand the working landscape without changing any one partner’s underlying structure. Learning each agency’s vocabulary, needs and definitions of services is vital in being able to design systems that achieve the most effective outcomes. 
Missouri took the time to define “meaningful referral” for each agency and through that method each agency knew how to implement policy changes to meet the WIOA state plan.
Persistence paid off in the resulting website. Regular and consistent communication was vital to its success. The persistent effort by the partners to communicate clearly developed into the outcomes achieved. Not only did this project create a useful tool for all WIOA partners and the citizens of Missouri, the project’s required regular communication across agencies developed relationships, trust and opened additional opportunities to leverage a partner’s existing systems.
Partners working together to design systems is the principle behind WIOA. Each partner participated regularly and consistently throughout the many meetings to maintain communication. Commentary was heard by committees and led, on occasion, to the group reconsidering a decision based upon staff feedback. 
Partners continue to improve the website and communicate more effectively. This is one of many examples of WIOA partners working together to achieve the mission of workforce development for the citizens, employers and State of Missouri.

WWW.MO.SERVICESNAVIGATOR.ORG

log in screen for MO Services Navigator
9

RAPID RESPONSE: 						EMPLOYMENT TRANSITION TEAM

DWD, in coordination with local Workforce Development Boards, provides Rapid Response services to individuals and businesses impacted by layoffs and/or closures. 
Upon notification of a layoff or closure, a member of the DWD Employment Transition Team (ETT) reaches out to the company and offers to coordinate an on-site Rapid Response meeting for all impacted workers. 
Designed to be flexible to meet the needs of the individual and business, it is explained that career transition services are available to them at no cost. The goal is to quickly provide the most valuable information, tools, and resources that are needed to assist the individual’s transition to a new career. 
During Fiscal Year (FY) 2018, DWD assisted 92 companies who experienced either a layoff or closure, resulting in approximately 8,481 dislocated workers. This is an increase from the previous year (FY17) with approximately 4,086 dislocated workers impacted from 76 companies either laying off or closing. 
While Missouri’s dislocated worker numbers more than doubled in FY 18, the unemployment number remained below the national average, consistently tracking between 3.2% and 3.5%. 
This low unemployment rate reflects efforts of not only the ETT and local Job Centers, but also alignment with economic developers who engage with businesses that are either expanding or moving to Missouri and seeking a skilled workforce. 
Evidence of this alignment was demonstrated in October of 2017, when TD Ameritrade announced they were going to acquire Scottrade in St. Louis. This acquisition would affect over 1,200 Scottrade employees, and occur in seven different layoffs throughout the year while TD Ameritrade needed to onboard new staff. ETT, local the Workforce Development Board, local economic developers, and the St. Louis Regional Chamber developed a strategy to assist those transitioning to new careers, as well as attracting talent for the new company. 
DWD and the local WDB established a satellite Job Center on the Scottrade campus to accommodate the needs of both the employees and companies providing hiring events, workshops and training based on surveys conducted with employees.
The success of an on-site satellite Job Center is currently being emulated in Kansas City with the announcement of the Harley Davidson closure. Similar to Scottrade, 1,200 Harley Davidson employees will be impacted by the closure of this facility, with the final layoff date anticipated to be June 2019. The ETT, local WDB, local economic developers, AFL-CIO Union Representatives, and the state Department of Economic Development are working closely with Harley Davidson to offer transition assistance. 

Materials presented at Rapid Response meetings include information on: 
•	
Job Center services 

•	
Available Job Center workshops 		  Including:


•	
Local job market information

•	
Potential companies seeking 			candidates

•	
How to file unemployment 			insurance 

•	
COBRA health insurance

•	
Job fairs

•	
Skills assessment and training



•	
OJT

•	
Apprenticeships

•	
Resume writing

•	
Interviewing techniques



10

DISLOCATED WORKER GRANTS

The Division of Workforce Development received a disaster recovery National Dislocated Worker Grant in the amount of $2.7 million in PY17, referred to as the MO-42 grant. The MO-42 grant specifically worked to place dislocated workers and long term unemployed individuals in temporary positions to assist in the cleanup and recovery efforts associated with the historic flooding, which occurred in April 2017. 
The MO-42 grant application was also part of Missouri’s statewide Recovery Support plan in response to this disaster. Grant activities were implemented through four participating local Workforce Development Boards. 
All eligible dislocated workers were co-enrolled into the WIOA dislocated worker program for assistance with reemployment services after grant participation. Additionally, workers served through local Rapid Response events were recruited into the grant, where appropriate. 
The MO-42 has a period of performance of two-years and will continue activities into PY18. At close of PY17, a total of 59 participants have been placed in temporary employment activities. 

Dislocated worker from Southwest Missouri
Road repair in progress in Southwest Missouri
CHARLESTON, MO WELCOMES NEW ADULT EDUCATION & LITERACY CENTER

The Cape Girardeau Adult Education & Literacy Center (AEL), sponsored by DWD and the Charleston Housing Authority, opened an education center in Charleston, Missouri, in October of 2018. 
AEL helps adult with education that will lead to better career opportunities. Adults aged 17 or older can take the High School Equivalency Exam which gives them a needed credential for many jobs. AEL helps with remediation of learning gaps in language, reading and math skills. Assessment of a student’s weaknesses are made and then the team sets out to meet their needs. 
This program is aimed at helping adults who are not in school or had to leave school before they reached their degree. In concert with other partner programs, students can receive assistance with child care, travel to classes, books and more based upon need and available funds. Barriers to sustainable employment are addressed so that the adults can be successful. You can see more about this project on the Cape Girardeau AEL Facebook page.

 Cape Girardeau AEL Facebook page

11

EFFECTIVENESS IN SERVING EMPLOYERS

“Missouri businesses receiving two or more services over the last 
three years increased to 
52.2% in Program Year 2017”

12

EFFECTIVENESS IN SERVING JOB SEEKERS

Statewide job seekers returned over 30,000 surveys in both paper and electronic forms. On average, there was a 43% response rate due to the diligence of staff emphasizing the importance of hearing from customers. Staff gave job seekers multiple prompts, from signage to verbal reminders, to encourage survey completion.
The satisfaction level of job seekers has been generally positive regarding interactions with staff across all regions. Customer service is emphasized in all Job Centers which has resulted in overall job seeker satisfaction. 
Job seekers had the opportunity to provide other comments on the surveys across the state and any negative comments received were addressed by the appropriate staff and solutions reached whenever possible. However, there were times when the negative comment had no real solution because it was out of the staff’s purview, such as limited transportation options to the center.
Continuous improvement has been a direct result of job seeker surveys. Job seeker survey responses have been used by some Job Centers to trigger additional training for staff. Desk aids were created to be available at the computer area so that people could refer to information on resume writing or frequently asked questions without needing to wait for staff assistance. 
Based upon feedback from surveys, the customer resource list continues to grow as job seekers inform us of additional needs. 
In one center, survey results allowed the director to adjust staffing schedules to meet peak traffic on certain days and times. At another center, they bought privacy screens for the computer area so that people felt more comfortable entering personal information on resumes. As one director said, “Quite honestly, we took the feedback to heart.”

“Quite honestly, we took the feedback to heart.”

CIRCUMSTANCES FOR MISSOURI ADULT CREDENTIAL MEASURE IN WIOA

During Program Year 2016, Missouri was using a service delivery model which incorporated our “Co-Enrollment policy” as a part of our Next Generation Career Center model. This model was formally approved by the USDOL Regional Administrator. 
Co-enrollment began with the job seeker completing our “membership” process which, by design, distilled registration down into 14 data elements and allowed the job seeker to self-attest to those data elements. It was policy under this program to accept what the job seeker selected as their educational status. 
This approach, combined with changing the calculation method for this measure from WIA to WIOA, led to creating the circumstances of a large number of participants who self-attested to being in an educational program, making the Division responsible for verifying whether or not they were engaged in such a program. This verification was often impossible and, in the end, the purposes of the Next Generation initiative are at odds with WIOA because persons attested on their own as being in an educational program, but case managers could not verify credential attainment. This verification was not specifically part of the model  in WIA, and we have learned, is often impossible now under WIOA. 
As Program Year 16 began, we formulated a policy for our reporting system to place all those job seekers who self-attested into the Credential Measure if they were currently attending school. After review and discovery, research and developing possible alternatives to our membership screens, it was decided that we could not recode our case management system because we were engaged in the implementation of the Geographic Solutions software. A conclusion was made that it would be more advantageous to simply start anew after these self-attested participants exited out of the system. 
It was decided that we would have to work through the consequences of this approach on performance for Program Year 17 and Program Year 18 until all of those particular job seekers cycled out of performance for the Credential measure. 
Throughout WIOA implementation, we have been diligent about client registration and case management training, performance management work groups and training, and changing our customer intake culture to acknowledge that it is vital to verify that participants are in an educational program.

13

CIRCUMSTANCES FOR YOUTH MEASURES IN WIOA

Through Program Year 17, we learned that many young people are not responsive in providing information or follow-up visits as they neared completion of summer work or training. 
The Job Centers have adjusted to the difficulty of following up with youth by using text messages in addition to traditional modes of communication. So far it appears that the text message approach increases response rates from youth job seekers. 
Additionally, with the implementation of the new data management system, it became apparent over Program Year 17 that we were encountering data entry errors. We are developing a youth performance crosswalk and data entry training has been provided to all relevant staff so that these entry errors will be reduced. 

PROGRAM YEAR 2017 PERFORMANCE OUTCOMES

Wagner-Peyser

Youth

Dislocated Worker

Adult

Employment Rate 2nd Quarter After Exit

68.7%

72.5%

72.5%

67.0%

Employment Rate 4th Quarter After Exit

66.4%

70.2%

68.0%

70.8%

$5,800.00

$4,844.00

$5,100.00

Median Earnings

51.0%

67.2%

Credential Attainment

46.5%

14

SHOW-ME STATE NUMBERS

ESTABLISHMENT COUNT

EMPLOYER SERVICES TYPE				

7,173
16,301
1,563
2,433
207
55
308
278

Employer Information & Support Services			
Workforce Recruitment Assistance
Strategic Planning/Economic Development Activities
Untapped Labor Pools Activities
Training Services
Incumbent Worker Training Services
Rapid Response/Business Downsizing Assistance
Planning Layoff Response

NUMERATOR	

                    PERFORMANCE RESULTS			

RATE	

DENOMINATOR		

Retention with the same employer in the 2nd and 4th Quarters After the Exit Quarter

6.20%

16,866

Employer Retention Rate

8.10%

207,431

2,441

52.20%

Repeat Business Customer Rate

4,674

15

EQUAL OPPORTUNITY ACCOMPLISHMENTS

Missouri’s workforce system is committed to nondiscrimination and equal opportunity for all programs and services offered through the Job Centers. The local Workforce Boards are responsible for conducting an annual statistical data analysis on every program and services offered through the Job Centers utilizing the 4/5th rule and the two-standard deviation formula. The local areas are responsible for investigating any discrepancies and implementing an outreach plan to address under served populations.
Missouri’s Equal Opportunity Unit has presented webinars and other presentations on equal opportunity topics with the LEAD Center and at the National Association for State Workforce Agencies (NASWA) conference on innovative initiatives in Missouri’s workforce system. Below are several equal opportunity topics that were highlighted:

•	
Cross training with the Missouri Department of Mental Health and Job Centers to ensure staff have a good understanding of the services available with both agencies.


•	
The Missouri Inter-agency Transition Team (MITT) established to increase collaboration at the state, regional and local levels with the shared vision of improving employment, independent living, and postsecondary outcomes for Missouri students with disabilities.


•	
Partnering with several departments within the State of Missouri for several statewide employment initiatives of the Employment First State Leadership Mentoring Program (EFSLMP) including Missouri Vocational Rehabilitation, Rehabilitation Services for the Blind, Department of Mental Health and Developmental Disabilities Division, as well as others.


•	
Multiple workforce regions throughout Missouri encouraging equal employment for persons with disabilities by organizing business seminars. One such event, Accommodation for Success, is held in the St. Louis area to help businesses recruit and employ individuals with disabilities and includes a Reverse Job Fair.


•	
The unit is creative with finding training resources, tapping partners such as Great Plains ADA Center, Missouri Assistive Technology, and the Missouri Commission for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing.


•	
In order to bring awareness to the rights of all customers, the unit revamped its orientation process and added a mandatory webinar for staff and customers.



16

MISSOURI EQUAL OPPORTUNITY DEMOGRAPHICS 
PROGRAM YEAR 2017

Training

Received Individualized Career Services (Intensive)

Received Basic Career Service (Core)

Reportable Individual
(Self Service Only)

Participant
(Staff Assisted)

All Service Level

Program Year 2017
Participants Served

ALL PARTICIPANTS
Male
Female
Did Not Self-Identify

176,314
89,611
86,312
391

87,526
46,843
40,529
154

88,788
42,768
45,783
237

87,341
46,741
40,447
153

30,298
15,645
14,602
51

3,688
1,710
1972
6

176,314
11,642
17,692
43,041
15,151

87,526
11,642
17,692
43,041
15,151

88,788
6,412
19,783
47,079
14,728

87,341
11,503
17,661
43,034
15,143

30,298
3,346
5,421
15,228
6,303

3,688
580
1,008
1,700
400

ALL AGES
Age: 14-21
Age: 22-29
Age: 30-54
Age: 55+

176,314
4,721
1,649
50,612
1,564
112,066
6,101

87,526
2,723
788
25,955
739
56,749
3,270

88,788
1,998
861
24,657
825
55,317
2,831

87,341
2,719
788
25,907
737
56,616
3,265

30,298
896
314
8,020
192
20,407
1,069

3,688
114
34
1,077
35
2,483
150

ALL RACES
American Indian/Alaskan Native
Asian
African American
Pacific Islander
White
More Than One Race

87,526
2,775
4,555

ALL HISPANICS
Hispanic
Did not Self-Identify

3,688
96
685

30,298
801
1,859

87,341
2,767
4,552

88,788
2,304
699

176,314
5,079
5,254

87,526
5,598
66,818

87,341
5,550
66,694

30,298
2,109
19,907

3,688
89,611
86,312

ALL DISABILITY
Disabled
No Disability

176,314
9,236
126,273

88,788
3,638
59,455

17



