 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Executive Summary ........................................................................................... 2 
Employment Trends in Today’s Economy .......................................................... 7 
One-Stop Career System ................................................................................... 8 
Delivery of Program Services .......................................................................... 10 
WIOA Monitoring Activities .............................................................................. 16 
 
State Performance Accountability  ................................................................... 17 
Level of Service ............................................................................................... 17 
Cost Benefit ..................................................................................................... 18 
Research and Evaluation of Services .............................................................. 19 
Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act Waivers......................................... 21 
Customer Satisfaction ...................................................................................... 21 
Success of WIOA Involvement ........................................................................ 22 
 
Attachment A 
 
Attachment B 
Executive Summary  
Doug Burgum took office as the 33rd governor of North Dakota on December 15, 2016. This was his first run for political office. Prior to his service as Governor, Burgum helped lead Great Plains Software from a small startup company in 1983 into an award-winning tech firm that employed thousands of team members from more than 220 cities across North Dakota. Burgum led Great Plains as CEO through its initial public offering in 1997 and acquisition by Microsoft Corp. in 2001. He remained at Microsoft as senior vice president through 2007, helping the company stake a leading position in the global business applications software industry. 
 
Burgum brings a business leader’s approach to diversifying the economy, creating 21st century jobs, and revitalizing our main streets. During his State of the State speech in January of 2018, Burgum articulated his vision for the state: 
 
“Our administration is adopting a purpose statement and that purpose statement is simple. Six words. Empower people, improve lives and inspire success.” 
 
Governor Burgum’s success in the private sector can be connected to his people-centric philosophy. Under this leadership, Great Plains was named to FORTUNE magazine's list of "100 Best Companies to Work for in America" four times, a distinction also held by Microsoft Corporation during Burgum’s tenure there. Governor Burgum is bringing this principle to life through the five “cultural aspirations” that were created through a collaborative process that engaged his cabinet and extended leadership teams across the state. These six cultural aspirations include: 
 
1. Work as One - We understand that diverse teams working together across divisions and departments can bring all of the resources of our state to serve our citizens best. Being inclusive and sharing information provides a better outcome and is crucial to innovation. 


 
2. Citizen Focused - We strive to deliver the best service, with the right balance between technology and citizen facing time. With simplification at the core; we listen, design, create and deliver with citizens at the center of our work. 


 
3. Growth Mindset - We are curious. We learn from each other, finding the genius in what’s been done, eager to improve upon it. We feel supported and have courage to take risks with accountability, learning and applying the learning as we move ahead. 


 
4. Make a Difference - We are focused on the impact of each activity, program and interaction using data and analytics to identify priorities and measure outcomes. Continually striving for improvement and impact, effort alone does not equal success.  


 
5. Leadership Everywhere - We lead by example, promote team spirit and hold ourselves and others accountable. We have gratitude, empower each other and view failures as learning opportunities. We are humble, transparent, focused, and trustworthy. 


 
In addition to these cultural aspirations, Governor Burgum has declared five strategic initiatives, all of which relate in some way to North Dakota’s workforce plan: 
 
1. Reinventing Government – Governor Doug Burgum has called on lawmakers to join him in his quest to reinvent state government. He has challenged his cabinet to think about how to make tough decisions, how to drive change, be in a relentless pursuit of the exceptional. “Anything being done simply because ‘that’s the way we have always done it’ should be and must be rigorously and respectfully questioned,” Burgum said. “And no matter what, we must have the courage to admit that we can always do better.” “Right now is the time to right-size government, to balance our budget without raising taxes, to fund our priorities and do more with less,” Burgum said. 


 
2. Transforming Education – Governor Burgum has made three significant commitments to ensure that North Dakota’s educational system connects directly to the development of a 21st Century workforce. Governor Burgum created the Innovative Education Task Force to underscore North Dakota’s commitment to leading the nation in innovative education and a task force dedicated to supporting the development of technologies to detect Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS) and counter the nefarious use of UAS. And lastly, Governor Burgum signed an executive order creating a task force to assess the existing governance structure for higher education in North Dakota and determine if changes are needed to ensure the system meets the state’s educational and workforce needs in the 21st century. 


 
3. Tribal Partnerships – Governor Burgum is committed to promoting greater understanding of North Dakota's Native American tribes and highlighted opportunities for collaboration between state and tribal governments. Governor Burgum understands that the well-being of North Dakota Tribal people equates to the well-being of the state. 


 
4. Behavioral Health and Addiction – Recognizing that behavioral health and addiction impact the state’s ability to achieve its vision, including but not limited to the impact these issues have on the workplace. 


 
In January 2018, Governor Burgum signed an executive order creating the Office of Recovery Reinvented to promote strategic and innovative efforts to eliminate the shame and stigma associated with the disease of addiction. 
 
5. Main Street Initiative (MSI) – Finally, Governor Burgum’s “Main Street Initiative” is an effort to preserve the health and vitality of North Dakota’s more 


rural communities by empowering local leaders and communities to help attract 21st century workforce and compete in the global economy. 


 
The MSI has three components, all of which directly or indirectly relate to the state’s workforce plan: 
• smart and efficient infrastructure, 

• creation of healthy, vibrant communities, and 

• a 21st Century Workforce.  


 
With these cultural aspirations and strategic initiatives to guide our work, Governor Burgum’s vision for workforce development in North Dakota will result in a plan that: 1) identifies what matters most, with targeted, actionable goals accompanied by measurement and accountability systems; 2) acknowledges that tackling this issue requires collaboration across many state agencies; and goes beyond what has been done, and 3) demonstrates a new and innovative approach to thinking. 
 
Goals 
The Governor’s vision of bringing together all key players is illustrated through his leadership in working with key industries in the State and effectively addressing specific workforce issues. 
 
Great state success is attributed to three essential strategies for continued economic growth in addition to the five targeted industries. This holistic approach is intended to create jobs across all industries and sectors. 1. Sustaining a positive business climate. 2. Investing in research and development in the private sector and the university system. 3. Building on our success in the global marketplace by linking North Dakota businesses with foreign buyers. 
 
In November 2017, the new WIOA compliant State Board, the Workforce Development Council, had its first meeting. The meeting’s focus was to present workforce data and information for membership to use in future strategic planning activity. Once strategic initiatives are identified through the Workforce Development Council and the Executive Committee, Governor Set-Aside funds will be utilized to implement workforce strategies in the state. 
 
The Workforce Development Council will approach establishing workforce priorities and goal outcomes based on impact versus activity. According to the National Governor’s Association, most states take an uncoordinated approach to workforce strategy. The Council will use data and an evidence-based approach to form strategy through a priority focus rather than a program focus. When determining workforce goals and priorities, underutilized populations will be considered as solutions for the State’s workforce shortages. Aligning resources and partnering with other State Agency efforts such as the Department of Corrections, TANF, Adult Education services for English Language Learners, Native Americans, and individuals struggling with addiction will be given strong consideration. Goals will be formed with consideration on what drives the economy and supports the Governor’s vision. 
 
Governor Burgum has provided his expectations to the Council when creating the Workforce Strategic Plan and Goals. Those expectations of the plan will be: 
 
Strategic – A plan that identifies what matters most, with targeted, actionable goals accompanied by measurement and accountability systems. 
 
Cross-cutting – A plan that acknowledges that tackling this issue requires collaboration across a number of state agencies. 
 
Innovative – A plan that goes beyond what has been done, and demonstrates a new approach to thinking. 
 
Governor Burgum set his guidelines for the Council to follow in the Strategic Planning process. His guidelines are: 
• The Plan is based on a thorough understanding of North Dakota workforce needs, supported by data and evidence. 

• The Plan maximizes state and federal resources. 

• The Plan emphasizes industry-led solutions. 

• The Plan includes matching educational needs with workforce needs. 


 
Nursing Shortage 
In recognition of a shortage of healthcare workers in North Dakota, shortly after being sworn into office, Governor Burgum convened a taskforce comprised of a diverse group of stakeholders to examine the issue, identify causes, propose possible solutions, and to make recommendations to address this critical shortage. 
 
Governor’s Vision for Youth 
In September 2017, Governor Burgum created the Innovative Education Task Force to underscore North Dakota’s commitment to leading the nation in innovative education. The Innovative Education Task Force is made up of education, youth development, and business and community leaders. The Task Force is charged with creating a system to identify and support schools and districts implementing innovative practices, and with providing direction on how state government can empower districts to adopt student-centric learning practices designed to support a 21st century economy impacted by rapid technological change. 
 
The core mission of the Task Force is to advance innovative initiatives in education, empowering authentic learning experiences that prepare students to be contributing global citizens and lifelong learners. The Task Force will also seek to highlight best practices and provide state government direction on policy development and alignment with the educational needs of the 21st century. 
 
Governor Burgum joined Governors for Computer Science, a partnership comprised of bipartisan state leaders committed to advancing policy and funding to expand access to, and increase equity in, K-12 computer science education. “Providing access to computer science courses is fundamental to our students’ success and an important part of our focus on innovative education and addressing workforce development gaps 
in our state,” said Burgum. “Additional exposure to computer science in K-12 will help our students succeed in a 21st century economy where computing is part of virtually every facet of our daily lives.” Goals of the partnership include enabling all high schools to offer at least one rigorous computer science course, funding professional learning opportunities so teachers can be prepared to teach these courses and creating a set of high-quality academic standards for K-12 computer science to guide local implementation of courses. “As Code.org’s Regional Partner for North Dakota, we are excited that Governor Burgum has joined the GovsForCS partnership to make Computer Science education a priority for all K-12 students,” said Devin B. Holmes, Founder of America Campaign. “In collaboration with TIE, our Teachers Teaching Tech initiative is poised to bring no-cost professional development to North Dakota’s educators and develop more opportunities for students to gain relevant 21st century skills.” Burgum’s participation in the initiative dovetails with an ongoing partnership between North Dakota’s Department of Public Instruction and Microsoft Corp. to expand its TEALS initiative to rural schools. TEALS, which stands for Technology Education and Literacy in Schools, pairs a computer science professional with a classroom teacher to team-teach computer science. 
 
The Governor supports pathways to education and training through general education diplomas. The college and career readiness standards exemplify the workforce needs of business and industry. The Bank of North Dakota is a valuable partner in the support of students’ educational goals by providing financial support to out-of-school youth for the first and final GED test fees. Adult education also receives support from WIOA Title I and Title IV partner core programs. North Dakota ranks among the top in the country of high school students graduating; however, there are young people who drop out-of-school or do not continue to higher education. The Governor’s vision is to identify and reach these out-of-school youth as early as possible to assist them with reconnecting to education and careers. 
 
Incorporating a model of career information and career promotion will ensure that students, parents, educators, and other career influencers are aware of the career opportunities which are being created by North Dakota business and industry and the requirements for those opportunities. Two industry awareness efforts, energy and information technology, are in place to inform secondary school youth, parents and teachers of employment opportunities. Both industry awareness efforts started with Governor’s state set-aside funds and due to the success, have been sustained. Career and Technical Education provides funding and enables the continuation of this career information. This effort supports the State’s vision by ensuring that youth and others have information on careers specific to North Dakota and their region at their disposal. This will assist them in making career choices which will lead to employment in North Dakota. 
 
The Career Outlook is a publication of the North Dakota Department of Career and Technical Education’s Career Resource Network. The publication includes a multitude of information that assists youth to research and plan for their career. Youth can complete a self-assessment, a career clusters interest inventory, research occupations, explore options to finance education, military opportunities and employment. Youth and parents can explore career and education options, complete an interest profile and a skills survey, 
and plan for high school and college. A portfolio is created and can be revisited as students make decisions throughout their school years and post-secondary. 
 
Employment Trends in Today’s Economy 
North Dakota’s economy continues to show strength, while beginning to show some effects of reduced commodity prices in energy and agriculture sectors. Comparison of the most recent two annual averages (2016-2017) show covered employment increase of approximately 0.5%. However, North Dakota continues to display a high labor force participation rate compared to the nation (Figure 1). The most recent (2017) annual Current Population Survey figures show North Dakota’s labor force participation rate for residents age 16 years and older was 71.5%, almost nine percentage points higher than the United States. This highlights how strongly engaged North Dakota residents are in the state’s economy. See Attachment A, Figure 1. 
 
In recent years, North Dakota’s labor force participation rate has been among the highest in the nation. Not only was labor force participation high, but the unemployment rate was quite low compared to the United States. In calendar year 2017, the unemployment rate in North Dakota was 2.6%, while the United States had an unemployment rate of 4.4%. 
 
Industry Projections 
The 2016-2026 industry projections expect job growth for most industries in North Dakota. Table 1 displays the top ten industries expected to add the most jobs to North Dakota’s economy while Table 2 displays the top ten industries with the highest projected growth rates. Health Care and Social Assistance is expected to add 11,626 jobs in a ten-year period and is projected to grow 19.7% from 2016-2026. See Attachment A, Table 1 and 2. 
 
Occupational Projections 
Occupational projections are calculated by looking at growth openings (number of anticipated openings due to new demand for that occupation) and replacement openings (number of anticipated openings due to workers who permanently leave an occupation due to retirement, death, change of job, etc.). Occupations with the highest projected percent growth typically correspond to the industries that expect a high level of growth. Occupations typically found in the mining industry are fast growing occupations. Table 3 displays the top fastest growing projected occupations in North Dakota. The table is just an example of the variety of fast growing occupations in the state. See Attachment A, Table 3. 
 
Education can also play a role in predicting where employment trends are heading. Occupations that require a postsecondary nondegree award or an associate’s degree are expected to grow by 17.5%, occupations that require a bachelor’s degree are expected to grow by 14.2%, and occupations that require a master’s, doctoral or professional degree are expected to grow by 12.8%. Occupations requiring short-term on-the-job training (<30 days) are projected to grow by 10.9%, and long-term on-the-job training (>12 months) by 13.9%. 
North Dakota Job Openings Data  
Online job openings statistics provide a timely overview of the current supply/demand dynamic of North Dakota's labor market. Job Service North Dakota online labor exchange system is the underlying source for the job openings and resume data produced. The latest online job openings (July 2018) totaled 12,789 open and available positions (Figure 2). Openings have increased from one year ago by 1,841. Of the 22-non-military major occupational groups, healthcare practitioners and technical reported the largest number of openings with 1,741, followed by transportation and material moving with 1,234 and sales and related with 1,201. 
 
Active resumes totaled 6,250 (Figure 3). Active resumes were 16.5% lower than one year ago. Of the 22-non-military major occupational groups, office and administrative support reported the largest number of active resumes with 1,450 followed by management with 629 and transportation and material moving with construction and extraction with 564. See Attachment A, Figure 2 and 3. 
 
One-Stop Career System 
Job Service North Dakota is the designated State Workforce Agency that provides services under Title IB, which serves adults, dislocated workers and youth. Job Service has nine One-Stop Career Centers. In addition to the physical locations, www.jobsnd.com offers an online presence available 24/7 for the convenience of all individuals. 
 
All stakeholders including businesses, students, job seekers, researchers, and public officials have access to all federally-funded workforce development programs, as well as several state-funded programs through the One-Stop System. Job Service North Dakota performs the One-Stop Operator responsibilities. 
 
Programs and Services for One-Stop Career Centers include: 
• Workforce Innovation & Opportunity Act (WIOA) - Adults, Dislocated Workers, Youth 

• Wagner-Peyser 

• Unemployment Insurance 

• Job Opportunities and Basic Skills (JOBS) 

• Labor Market Information (LMI) 

• Veterans Employment and Training Programs (VETS) 

• Trade Adjustment Assistance 

• Foreign Labor Certification 

• Work Opportunity Tax Credit 

• Parental Responsibility Initiative for the Development of Employment (PRIDE) 

• Basic Employment Skills Training (BEST) 

• North Dakota New Jobs Training 


 
The One-Stop Career core and required system partners include: 
• Job Corps 

• Adult Education and Family Literacy Act 

• Vocational Rehabilitation 


• Motivation, Education and Training under National Farmworker Jobs Program  

• Post-secondary Vocational Education under the Carl D. Perkins Act 

• Experience Works, ND Senior Career Development and NICOA under the Senior Community Service Employment Program 


 
North Dakota capitalizes on the strengths each partner brings to the system while reducing or eliminating duplication of products and services. The simplicity in the structure with defined partner roles and responsibilities allows case managers and providers to deliver the services necessary for North Dakota's growth and competitive edge. Program costs are based on the fair share allocation as determined by the State Memorandum of Understanding (MOU). 
 
The One-Stop Career delivery system delivers services in the following manner: 
1. Self-Service – Online from remote locations or within the Career Center resource area. 

2. Basic Career Services – Online through electronic media (e-mail) or telephone assistance for those who need help with PC system tools, identification of skills and qualifications, job order development, and assessment of need for other services. Job seekers receive services within the One-Stop Career Center resource rooms. 

3. Individualized Career Services – Individuals who request or are perceived to need more one-on-one assistance may receive in-depth services in the form of skill assessment, qualification identification for available jobs, career counseling/promotion based on the state’s targeted industries and labor market information. In addition, short term industry specific skill training, and possible degree programs are options that are available to individuals using staff-assisted services. 


 
WIOA Informational Career Services and partner websites were available through the SHARE Network (Sharing How Awareness of Resources Empowers) link on jobsnd.com. The SHARE Network was an internet-based, electronic referral system connecting North Dakota’s One-Stop Career Centers with over 700 service providers that helped individuals obtain, retain, or advance in employment. The unique partnership worked together to help individuals transition to self-sufficiency. 
 
Each One-Stop Career Center has a resource area with computers available for individual self-service. Resource area staff promote tools to assist individuals in making career choices such as the RUReadyND.com, resume writing software, myskillsmyfuture.org, and mynextmove.org. The resource areas also offer a wide variety of printed materials. Resource area staff is available to assist those who lack computer skills. 
 
Job Service North Dakota has a tool available to help individuals improve their computer skills. Microsoft Digital Literacy (www.microsoft.com\digitalliteracy) is offered as part of the Microsoft Digital Alliance with North Dakota. Whether our customers are new to computers or seasoned users, there is a wealth of information that may be beneficial. Topics include computer basics, the internet, productivity 
programs (Word, Excel, PowerPoint, Access), and computer security and privacy. Computers are available at all Job Service North Dakota locations for this self-directed training. 
 
Job Service staff deliver skills-focused services and ultimately help job seekers meet the increasing need for skilled workers by providing the following services: 
• Skill assessment 

• Staff address job search techniques, interviewing and résumés skills and basic computer skills one-on-one with individuals 

• Referrals to skill development activities 

• Promotion of high-wage/high-demand and target industries 

• Referral possibilities to internal and external programs/partners 

• Referrals to a veterans’ representative as appropriate 


 
Job Service staff participate in regional career expos. Career expos are designed to educate attendees about career opportunities and related training and education that will open doors to a chosen field. Employers exhibiting at a career expo are not there to immediately hire employees, but rather to educate and inspire their future workforce. These events connect Job Service, Career & Technical Education, employers, economic development professionals, teachers, students and parents to meet the regional employment demands. In addition to hands-on exhibits, the career expos feature break-out seminar sessions for students. Sessions feature topics in numerous career clusters. An example of a career expo can be viewed at this site: http://conferences.und.edu/nvcareerexpo/. 
 
Job Service assists in workforce recruitment efforts by offering space in the One Stop offices for businesses to hold individual, on-site job fairs. Job seekers accessing One Stop services on-site are invited to meet with business representatives. Social media outreach invites all job seekers statewide to these events. A wide array of businesses, ranging from retail, energy, trucking, and healthcare take advantage of this service. 
 
Delivery of Program Services 
The One-Stop system partners work collaboratively to remove barriers so that each partner has access to appropriate records, accurate and timely information for federal reporting, and can improve services to the target population groups. One- Stop Career Centers deliver services with a customer-focused approach providing skill level assessments, evaluations of skill development and support service needs, and career counseling. This approach is used to determine service needs for: 
• Individuals with disabilities 

• Dislocated workers, including trade impacted 

• Displaced homemakers 

• Individuals with multiple challenges to employment 

• JOBS participants 

• Non-custodial parents 

• Low-income individuals including recipients of public assistance 


• Migrants and seasonal farm workers 

• Minorities 

• New Americans and others with limited English proficiency 

• Older individuals 

• School dropouts 

• Veterans 

• Ex-offenders 

• Homeless individuals 


 
Because North Dakota WIOA Adult funds are so limited, only low income or basic skills deficient individuals are enrolled into individual career services and training. North Dakota met the Youth priority of 75% out-of-school and 20% work experience expenditure for PY17. 
 
Veterans and eligible spouses of veterans - covered persons - will receive priority of service. 20 CFR Part 1010.110 adopts the term “covered person” to define those veterans and spouses of eligible veterans who are eligible for priority of service. The Jobs for Veterans Act does not change the requirement that individuals, to include veterans and military spouses, must first qualify as eligible under the WIOA Adult Program before participation.  
WIOA Career Services 
Job seekers visiting a One-Stop Career Center receive skill assessment, career counseling, and labor market information. Job Service staff recommends on-site development tools to help improve individuals’ interviewing skills, soft skills, and computer skills. Staff also recommend short-term industry training or degree programs through WIOA services and other partner referrals. 
 
Skill assessments, career guidance using labor market information, job search assistance, and access to WIOA assistance are available to all job seekers. Skill assessments help staff match job seekers to employers’ job openings and make appropriate training program referrals. 
 
Online Services 
Online services are available to individuals via self-service 24 hours a day, 7 days a week from anywhere internet access is available. Jobsnd.com links to the online labor exchange system for individual job searching and employer job posting activities. Job seekers can use jobsnd.com to create résumés and conduct automated job searches. Additionally, individuals can become aware of education and training programs available and view labor market information such as high-demand occupations, current wages and training required. Individuals can also explore career options, find direction to veteran services, and access community resources. 
 
North Dakota Unemployment Insurance claimants are required to have a résumé on file with jobsnd.com. When a claimant files a claim online, information is interfaced to jobsnd.com and creates a partial registration. Jobsnd.com uses the partial 
registration data to automatically perform a job search and notify the claimant of suitable job openings. 
 
The Labor Market Information Center’s online resource is the North Dakota 
Workforce Intelligence Network (NDWIN). NDWIN is accessible through jobsnd.com and serves as the state’s premiere up-to-date workforce resource for our customers. 
 
Adults and Dislocated Worker Services  
Job Service One-Stop Career Centers provide career services to adults and dislocated workers. Services include: 
• Determinations of individuals’ eligibility for WIOA assistance 

• Outreach, intake, and orientation of services available 

• Initial assessments of skill levels, abilities, and support service needs 

• Job search assistance with career counseling as appropriate 

• Labor market information 

• Eligible training provider information 

• Information regarding the availability of support services and referrals to appropriate services 

• Assistance establishing eligibility for financial aid assistance for training and education 

• Follow-up services 


 
One-Stop Career Centers and partner programs provide individualized services to adults and dislocated workers who are unemployed, unable to obtain employment through core services, need more intensive services to obtain employment or are employed but need more intensive services to obtain or retain employment that allows for self-sufficiency. Individualized services include: 
• Skill level and service needs assessments 

• Employment plan development which includes setting employment goals, achievement objectives, and services needed to achieve the goals 

• Group or individual counseling 

• Career planning 

• Case management for individuals seeking training services 

• Short-term pre-vocational services 


 
Individual Training Accounts (ITAs) are used by the State to provide classroom training only. Priority for awarding ITAs will be given as follow: 
 
1. Classroom training services are provided through individual training accounts while On-the-Job training (OJT) is provided through a contract between the One-Stop WIOA program provider and the employer.  

2. Career pathway information is provided by case managers during career exploration activities.  

3. Customer choice is supported by the provision of labor market information and through the occupations included on the North Dakota In-Demand Occupations list and Eligible Training Provider list (ETPL).  


 
The ITA award amount for an individual will be based on the assessment and employment plan prepared for that individual. The assessment includes a financial determination of the individual’s current resources and expenses, including financial aid from schools and family support. Recipients will be required to apply for a Pell Grant and other alternative funding sources where appropriate. 
 
Ongoing proactive efforts exist within the various areas of the state through cooperation between Job Service staff members and economic development. When a layoff is pending, opportunities to help transition impacted workers to expanding and new North Dakota businesses are effectively coordinated in order to retain a skilled workforce. For businesses in other stages of the economic cycle, assistance from outside resources is offered as well as information on recruitment services, Unemployment Insurance, workforce training, SHARE Network, WOTC, business tax incentives, and the North Dakota New Jobs Training program. 
 
Youth Services 
The WIOA Youth program incorporates all the requirements outlined in the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act, specifically, objective assessments, employment planning (individual service strategies) and referral processes. All youth services are accessible through the Job Service AJCs and services are designed based on labor market information. All youth, including youth with disabilities, entering the service delivery process receive an objective assessment. Assessment follows the guidelines in WIOA, section 129, including a review of academic and occupational skills, interests and supportive service needs. Assessments provide the needed information and data to complete employment plans that link employment, educational and career pathway goals with the service strategies necessary to reach employment goals. 
 
Within the program foundation are the concepts of improving educational achievement, preparing for and succeeding in employment, supporting youth, and offering services in an effort to develop our youth’s leadership potential. Funds provide support, employment/employability assistance, and training to eligible participants age 14 to 24 (out-of-school youth aged 16-24 and in-school youth must be aged 14-21 under WIOA). 
 
Assessment information and employment strategies are shared with appropriate partners to encourage consistent and accurate information that helps foster a continuum of services. 
 
Information and referral processes introduce youth to the wide array of available services through the One-Stop system. Applicants who do not meet the WIOA Youth program eligibility criteria are vital in filling the talent pipeline. Individuals, 18 years of age and older, receive information and referral to services specific to their needs. 
 
Youth Participants have the opportunity to participate in paid and/or unpaid work experience activities, including internships and job shadowing. These activities provide skills and experience and help youth understand what is associated with 
“real work” and employer requirements. Additionally, youth have access to services provided at the One-Stop Career Centers, including assistance with work search, résumé writing, interviewing, career exploration, and job openings on jobsnd.com to learn of unsubsidized employment opportunities in the state. 
 
Job Service partners with local school districts who provide alternative secondary school services. These services are vital to re-engage youth who have not responded to traditional school settings. 
 
Summer employment opportunities, paid and unpaid work experience, including internships, job shadowing, and occupational skills training are directed at preparing youth for successful North Dakota employment. Summer employment opportunities are directly linked to academic and occupational learning. In most rural areas in North Dakota, youth are initially introduced to jobs through summer employment opportunities. Activities for youth with significant barriers to employment focus on pre-employment and work maturity skills. Older youth will focus on occupational skills training and utilize ITA’s. However, the individual plan of each youth focuses on the needs identified through the individualized assessment process. 
 
Youth with the interests in pursuing North Dakota-based post-secondary educational opportunities, including non-traditional training, are targeted for occupational skills training. Participants are supported in this process through tutoring services and study skills training which aids in the completion of secondary school. North Dakota uses the ITA process for youth based on the Department of Labor approved waiver. Youth ITAs maximize the WIOA Youth program service delivery capacity within the One-Stop Career Center delivery system by allowing youth the same access as adults and dislocated workers. 
 
Focus is placed on preparing youth for high-wage/high-demand occupations in the Governor’s target industries as well as in support industries, such as transportation and healthcare. 
 
Job Service and the state apprenticeship office collaborate to establish and expand awareness of registered apprenticeship opportunities to older youth. Youth may receive work experience opportunities and those 18 and older may receive on-the-job training. These are excellent tools for workforce readiness and skill building. 
 
Youth are provided leadership development opportunities. Mentoring with caring adults is sought to provide consistent guidance and support. Activities and projects that provide citizenship skills, life skills training, community improvement skills, and increase positive social skills, are used to develop overall leadership qualities. 
 
WIOA Youth coordinators provide ongoing case management for all youth participants. Based on the assessment, youth are referred to appropriate services, including career counseling and promotion, specialized counseling, guidance and skill assessment. Information is shared with other partners involved in the assessment to help unify and enhance the guidance and counseling process. 
Support services are provided to youth to assist them in completing their individual service strategies. All youth receive follow-up services for at least 12 months after participation ends. The intensity of follow-up services is based on individual need. 
 
With the implementation of WIOA, the five new WIOA youth program elements are available to eligible youth. These include: financial literacy, entrepreneurial skills training, labor market information, activities to help youth transition to post-secondary education and training and education offered concurrently with workforce preparation activities and training for specific occupations. 
 
Service to youth is monitored to ensure the out-of-school youth spending requirement of 75% is met. 
 
Youth with Significant Barriers to Employment. 
The program focuses on serving at-risk youth including youth in (and aging out of) foster care, homeless youth, runaway youth, dropouts, offenders, pregnant or parenting youth, youth with disabilities, and youth deficient in basic skills. A comprehensive assessment is conducted to assess the needs of all youth to determine what activities are most appropriate to assist the youth in employment and academic success. Job Service ensures that youth have access to the fourteen required program elements as needed, whether provided by Job Service, a partner program, or a contracted service provider. 
 
Job Service continues to develop and grow relationships where youth partner service integration is strong. Partnerships include secondary schools and colleges, tribal youth programs, Job Corps, Youthworks, vocational rehabilitation, adult education, foster care including Chafee Independent Living programs and correctional/residential treatment facilities. WIOA Youth program staff participate on state or regional Disability Transition Community of Practice and Transition to Independence for at-risk youth advisory committees. Services are coordinated with partner programs when dual enrollments occur to ensure youth receive the best services to meet their needs in a cost-effective manner. 
 
Training Services 
The table below illustrates the number of individuals enrolled in training services for the current and past three program years. 
 
 INDIVIDUALS ENROLLED IN WIOA TRAINING  
 
 PY 14 
 PY 15 
 PY 17 
 

Adult 
 167 
 163 
 212 
 
Dislocated Worker 
 23 
 39 
 28 
 
Youth 
 108 
 123 
 78 
 
Total 
 298 
 325 
 318 
 


 
Individuals trained with WIOA funding during PY 17 continue to support the Governor’s target industries and high-demand focus for the Workforce Development Council as reflected in the table below.  
PY 17 ACTIVE WIOA TRAINING ENROLLMENT NUMBERS WITHIN  
TARGETED INDUSTRIES AND HIGH-WAGE/HIGH-DEMAND OCCUPATIONS 
 
 Adult 
 Dislocated Worker 
 Youth 
 Total Training 
 

 
 Number 
 Percent 
 Number 
 Percent 
 Number 
 Percent 
 Number 
 Percent 
 
Energy 
 23 
 11% 
 1 
 4% 
 13 
 16% 
 37 
 12% 
 
Manufacturing 
 20 
 9% 
 1 
 4% 
 9 
 12% 
 30 
 10% 
 
Technology 
 6 
 3% 
 5 
 18% 
 3 
 4% 
 14 
 4% 
 
Healthcare 
 70 
 33% 
 9 
 32% 
 40 
 51% 
 119 
 37% 
 
Transport 
 81 
 38% 
 9 
 32% 
 6 
 8% 
 96 
 30% 
 
Support Occupations1 
 6 
 3% 
 2 
 6% 
 1 
 1% 
 9 
 3% 
 
Other2 
 6 
 3% 
 1 
 4% 
 6 
 8% 
 13 
 4% 
 
Total 
 212 
 100% 
 28 
 100% 
 78 
 100% 
 318 
 100% 
 


1Includes occupations supporting all targeted industries including financial, administrative, human resources, and marketing. 
2 Includes occupations such as social service workers, legal, law enforcement, plumbers, and carpenters.  
 
Ninety-three percent (93%) of the total training enrollments are specific to or support the Governor’s targeted industries and high-wage/high-demand occupations. 
 
WIOA Monitoring Activities  
Job Service’s Workforce Programs unit is responsible for reporting of WIOA program performance data, and monitoring of WIOA activities. The Workforce Programs unit uses various methods to evaluate WIOA activities including quarterly desk reviews, annual WIOA program monitoring and WIOA data element validation. Document Imaging functionality was added to the case management system in May 2017 to ease the travel costs and create efficiencies with staff time. 
 
Desk reviews include biannual monitoring of participant WIOA expenditures. The process of monitoring expenditures includes pulling a sample of payments from the biannual payments made on behalf of WIOA participants and reviewing all the source documentation used to justify the payments in the sample. This biannual monitoring is conducted to ensure the One-Stop Career Centers are using program funds responsibly, as well as, assuring procedures and Job Service policies are adhered to by all customer service office staff. The results of the bi-annual participant WIOA expenditure reviews are documented and compiled in a formal report following the reviews and disseminated to the WIOA managers, supervisors, and customer service office staff for response and, as warranted, corrective action.  
 
Workforce Programs staff also conduct annual WIOA monitoring of the Job Service customer service offices. The annual monitor of the One-Stop Career Centers occurs every year during the months of October to December. WIOA adult, dislocated worker, and youth files are sampled and reviewed for compliance with federal WIOA regulations, and Job Service WIOA policies and procedure directives. At the conclusion of the monitor, the results and recommendations of the monitoring are reviewed with the customer service office managers and supervisors. A written report identifying deficiencies and recommendations for improvement is disseminated to the customer service office directors, managers, supervisors and 
customer service staff.  Upon findings and result compilations, corrective action is requested on a case by case basis. This monitoring enables WIOA customer service office managers, supervisors, and customer service staff to measure performance at the case manager level and where improvement is needed.  
 
State Performance Accountability 
The Workforce Development Division of the North Dakota Department of Commerce gathers performance results for workforce development and training programs in the state. The most recent copy of performance results can be viewed here: 
http://www.workforce.nd.gov/about/PerformanceAccountability 
 
Level of Service 
Title I Adult, Dislocated Worker, and Youth 
The assessed needs, existing skills, and personal situation of the individual determines the level of services provided, whether to adults, dislocated workers, or youth. A comprehensive array of services is provided to individuals in career and training services. Job Service North Dakota accounts for the cost categories required by the Workforce Innovation & Opportunity Act, not for the costs by activity. The primary indicators of performance under WIOA 116(b)(2)(A) include the following: 
 
Adult, Dislocated Worker, Youth Employment Rate 2nd Quarter After Exit 
The percentage of participants who are in unsubsidized employment during the second quarter after exit from the program (for Title I Youth, the indicator is the percentage of participants in education or training activities, or in unsubsidized employment during the second quarter after exit). 
 
Adult, Dislocated Worker, Youth Employment Rate 4th Quarter After Exit 
The percentage of participants who are in unsubsidized employment during the fourth quarter after exit from the program (for Title I Youth, the indicator is the percentage of participants in education or training activities, or in unsubsidized employment during the fourth quarter after exit). 
 
Adult, Dislocated Worker Median Earnings 2nd Quarter After Exit 
The median earnings of participants who are in unsubsidized employment during the second quarter after exit from the program. 
 
Adult, Dislocated Worker, Youth Credential 
The percentage of those participants enrolled in an education or training program (excluding those in on-the-job training (OJT) and customized training) who attain a recognized postsecondary credential or a secondary school diploma, or its recognized equivalent, during participation or within one year after exit from the program. A participant who has attained a secondary school diploma or its recognized equivalent is included in the percentage of participants who have attained a secondary school diploma or its recognized equivalent only if the participant is also employed or is enrolled in an education or training program leading to a recognized postsecondary credential within one year after exit from the program. 
 
Adult, Dislocated Worker, Youth Measurable Skill Gains 
The percentage of program participants who, during a program year, are in an education or training program that leads to a recognized postsecondary credential or employment and who are achieving measurable skill gains, defined as documented academic, technical, occupational, or other forms of progress, towards such a credential or employment. 
 
See Attachment B for PY 2017 WIOA Performance Outcomes. 
 
Title III Employment Service 
North Dakota has selected the following two performance measures for services provided to employers: 
 
Employer Penetration Rate 
The Employer Penetration Rate is measured by comparing the total number of establishments that received a service or, if it is an ongoing activity, are continuing to receive a service or other assistance during the reporting period, against the total number of establishments located within the state during the final month or quarter of the reporting period. (“Establishment” is defined by the Bureau of Labor Statistics Quarterly Census of Earnings and Wages program.) www.bls.gov/cew/cewfaq.htm#Q20) 
 
Employee Retention Rate 
The Employee Retention Rate is measured by using wage records to identify whether or not a participant matched the same federal employer identification number in the 2nd and 4th quarters after exit. 
 
Cost Benefit 
The State of North Dakota is a single local area; therefore, no allocation method is needed for distribution of adult, dislocated worker, and youth funds. All funds not reserved for statewide activities, including rapid response, are distributed to the single local area. Dislocated worker funds in the amount of $40,000 are reserved for statewide rapid response activities. 
 
North Dakota evaluates the effectiveness of program activities and costs based upon a participant’s positive results for the WIOA performance measures. Cost per participant and cost per positive outcome is computed for the WIOA Adult, Dislocated Worker, and Youth programs. The PY 2017 overall cost per participant served for all programs was $5,427. The PY 2017 overall cost per positive outcome for participants from all programs was $8,801. Increased training costs are a result of the in-demand occupations in the state. 
 
An individual may have more than one positive outcome. Each positive outcome enhances the individual’s ability to achieve and sustain long-term employment. The 
statewide data for expenditures, cost per participant, and positive outcome is displayed in the following table: 
 
Program 
 Program 
 Total 
 Cost per 
 Total 
 Cost per 

 

Adult 
 $1,738,134 
 354 
 $4,910 
 249 
 $6,980 
 
Dislocated Worker 
 $347,245 
 56 
 $6,201 
 42 
 $8,268 
 
Youth 
 $1,567,098 
 263 
 $5,959 
 124 
 $12,638 
 
TOTAL 
 $3,652,477 
 673 
 $5,427 
 415 
 $8,801 
 


1Includes Career and Training Services 
2Only Includes Employment Rate Q2 and Q4 
 
Analysis of WIOA performance measures is the primary method of program evaluation used this program year. North Dakota met or exceeded all required program performance measures for the WIOA Adult, Dislocated Worker and Youth program, except for the Youth Credential Rate. 
 
Research and Evaluation of Services 
Case managers provide services to eligible individuals including those who are ex-offenders. Case managers are encouraged to provide services and timely effective follow-up to ensure positive employment outcomes. The employment rate of ex-offenders compared to non-offenders was evaluated to determine effectiveness of staff assisted services for ex-offenders in each WIOA program. 
 
Analysis 
Adult – The employment rate 2nd quarter after exit shows ex-offenders at 69.8% compared to non-offenders at 81.2%. The employment rate 4th quarter after exit shows 80% for both ex-offenders and non-offenders. The employment rate for ex-offenders increased from 2nd to 4th quarter while non-offenders decreased slightly. 
 
Youth – The employment rate 2nd quarter after exit shows ex-offenders at 75% compared to non-offenders at 78.6%. The employment rate 4th quarter after exit shows 75% for ex-offenders and 73.8% for non-offenders. The employment rate for ex-offenders remained the same from 2nd to 4th quarter while non-offenders decreased slightly. 
 
Dislocated Worker – The employment rate 2nd quarter after exit shows ex-offenders at 66.7% compared to non-offenders at 96.2%. The employment rate 4th quarter after exit shows 100% for ex-offenders and 93.3% for non-offenders. The employment rate for ex-offenders increased from 2nd to 4th quarter while non-offenders decreased slightly. 
 
Exited Participants 
 

  
 Employment Rate 2nd Quarter After Exit: 7/1/16-6/30/17 
 Employment Rate 4th Quarter After Exit: 7/1/16-12/31/16 
 
  
 Employed Exiters 
 Rate 
 Negotiated Performance Rate* 
 Employed Exiters 
 Rate 
 Negotiated Performance Rate* 
 
Adult 
 181/229 
 79.0% 
 76.5% 
 68/85 
 80.0% 
 77.0% 
 
Ex Offender 
 30/43 
 69.8% 
   
 12/15 
 80.0% 
   
 
Non-Offender 
 151/186 
 81.2% 
   
 56/70 
 80.0% 
   
 
  
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
Youth 
 90/115 
 78.3% 
 70.0% 
 34/46 
 73.9% 
 75.0% 
 
Ex Offender 
 9/12 
 75.0% 
   
 N/A 
 75.0% 
   
 
Non-Offender 
 81/103 
 78.6% 
   
 31/42 
 73.8% 
   
 
  
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
DW 
 27/29 
 93.1% 
 80.0% 
 15/16 
 93.8% 
 83.0% 
 
Ex Offender 
 N/A 
 66.7% 
   
 N/A 
 100.0% 
   
 
Non-Offender 
 25/26 
 96.2% 
   
 14/15 
 93.3% 
   
 


*90% of the negotiated meets performance  
 
Conclusions 
Ex-offenders appear to need more time to secure unsubsidized employment after exiting programs. It has been determined that follow-up is a critical component to ensure positive employment outcomes. 
 
Ex-offenders represented less than 20% of the total exiters in all three programs in the cohorts in this study. The outcomes indicated minimal impact in meeting negotiated performance measures over the comparison period. 
 
Next Steps 
Based on these conclusions, North Dakota’s American Job Centers will continue to emphasize outreach, collaboration, and services to ex-offenders.  This aligns with Governor Burgum’s strategic initiatives for a skilled workforce and re-entry and recovery. 
 
North Dakota Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation’s Director Leann Bertsch was designated as an “innovator in corrections” by Charles F. Field, Jr in an article in Corrections.com published 2/19/2018. Leann Bertsch visited a maximum-security prison in Norway in 2015 and was “left shaken by her tour at the facility described by Time as the world’s most humane prison.” Bertsch believes Norway to be “20 years ahead of the US in terms of corrections and rehabilitation.” 
 
“Bertsch’s expressed goal upon her return from Norway was to strengthen the DOCR’s commitment to its mission by promoting and encouraging humanity within State facilities as a primary focus of each and every employee.” “The boldest reform advocated by Bertsch with the greatest impact…has been its Inmate Prioritization Plan endorsed by the governor and legislature.” 
 
“Director Bertsch counts industry associations as invaluable resources.” North Dakota Workforce studies determined a shortage of available workers to fill employment needs. Corrections release more than 100 inmates monthly, tapping into that potential employee pool may be one-way employers might expand their workforce. 
 
Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act Waivers 
North Dakota has no approved waivers under WIOA. 
 
Customer Satisfaction 
Job Fairs 
During job fairs, a survey is given to each employer one hour before the event ends. The survey consists of ten questions ranging from how many jobs seekers visited the booth, how many the employer would consider hiring, job fair times, promotion of the event, etc. These surveys are collected by staff 15 minutes prior to the event concluding resulting in a 100% success rate. Approximately two weeks after each job fair, a follow-up email is sent to each employer asking how many job seekers the employer hired from the event, how many are being considering, and how many are veterans. The average response rate was approximately 40%. 
 
Job Seekers and Employers 
During September 2017, all One-Stop Career Centers instituted a customer survey/suggestion box. Each survey consists of five short questions about their Workforce Center experience. Once the customer has completed the survey he/she can either turn it in at the front desk or put it in the “Suggestion/Survey” box. Each customer is highly encouraged to fill out a survey when he/she has worked with a staff member on a one-on-one basis or group orientation/training event. 
 
Additionally, individuals were selected to complete the customer satisfaction survey between January 1, 2016 and December 31, 2016. The survey selection pool consisted of all participants whose WIOA case closed within 60 days of the last activity end date. A random sample selection was applied to employers that received staff assisted services. 
 
Employer and participant surveys were sent by state staff via email. Due to the low number of responses, a second email reminder was sent to both employers and participants that had not responded to the initial email. Those with no email address listed in the MIS or had an undeliverable email address were sent a message through the MIS message center.   
 
The survey posed the same three questions to both the employer group and the participant group. The survey allowed for comments and of those individuals that did comment, almost all of them, both employers and participants were complimentary of staff and the services they received. Without identifying the employer/participant, the comments were shared with staff to show areas they did well in and areas they may need improvement, as perceived by their customers.    
 
Respondents who did not answer all three questions were excluded from the results below. The three questions that were asked are as follows: 
 
1. Did you receive the assistance and guidance you expected to receive? 

2. Did staff answer all of your questions? 

3. Rank the service you received 1-5 (1 lowest, 5 highest). 


The responses to Question 1 and 2 were asking for a yes/no response. Question 3 asked employers and participants to rank the service they received on a scale of 1-5, with 1 being the lowest and 5 being the highest. The responses are categorized as follows: 
 
Employers     Total 
Total number of employers selected  1,085 
Total number of responses      121 
Response rate for employer surveys      11.18% 
 
Responses to the three questions: 
    Yes    %  No   %   
Question 1   120 99.2%   1 0.8% 
Question 2   121 100%   0 0.0% 
 
Ranking Score  1  %        2   %   3 %     4   %        5       %  
Question 3     3    2.5%     0 0.0%   1 0.8%    18 14.9%       99   81.8% 
 
Participants     Total 
Total number of participants   179 
Total number of responses      10 
Response rate for participant surveys       5.6% 
 
Responses to the three questions: 
    Yes %   
Question 1   10 100%   
Question 2   10 100% 
 
Ranking Score    5 %  
Question 3*              10     100% 
*There were no ranking scores for 1-4. 
 
Success of WIOA Involvement  
The Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act programs positively impact the lives of Job Service customers daily. The success of WIOA benefits the individuals in becoming increasingly self-sufficient and North Dakota businesses seeking skilled candidates to fill positions. Examples of successful WIOA involvement follow. 
Youth Success Stories  
Carlos* was an out-of-school youth enrolled by the Fargo Job Service Office that went through the WIOA program starting January 2018 and finishing in June 2018. He had a troubled past and was eligible due to having a criminal record. He decided to pursue the 16-week course at Lynnes Welding. Carlos received funding through the WIOA program as well as support services for tools needed for training. 
 
Carlos truly wanted to better his life but did not know where to start. He started the welding program at Lynnes welding in April 2018 and excelled in the program. He was described as always on time and an excellent student. Carlos graduated and passed, earning five certifications in welding. 
 
Carlos became a union member. His mother was so happy, believing this will help save her son’s life, keeping him on a path away from law enforcement and drugs. Being introduced and enrolled in the WIOA program gave him purpose and showed him that with a little guidance and determination he could not only be successful but make his family and community proud. 
 
... 
 
Jordan* is a 19-year-old male, low income, on the free/reduced lunch program, and an individual with a disability, from a farming background. He was living in a rural area of North Dakota with a population of 783 and limited employment options. His high school counselor referred him for assistance to attend the North Dakota State College of Science (NDSCS) for the John Deere Technician program starting the fall of 2015. Jordan had taken some college level classes while in high school and worked part time as a shop helper with a local implement company. He was determined eligible under WIA In-School Youth Program. 
 
WIOA covered tuition, fees, cost of books, and the initial and final transportation costs to/from the training site. He started at NDSCS in August 2015. He was awarded several scholarships including two from the MLS Dollars for Scholars Chapter for college. 
 
Jordan successfully completed the John Deere Technician program in May 2017 and was on the President’s Honor Roll three times while attending NDSCS, completing with a 3.4 GPA. 
 
Jordan completed the 4 quarters of follow-up services in June of 2018 and remains employed with the local implement company at $18 per hour with benefits. He continues to receive training through the John Deere University and was recently sent to Canada for training and successfully completed the certification and received a college credit. 
 
... 
 
Dustin* came to Job Service in December 2015. He had no family support: his mom had passed away; his dad did not live in the US and his older siblings lived out of state. Dustin was a youth with a disability who was temporarily living with a high school friend’s family. He wanted to go to college to become an auto body technician but had to retake some high school classes before starting college. 
 
Dustin was co-enrolled in WIOA and Vocational Rehabilitation, seeking assistance to enroll in the Auto Body program at North Dakota State College of Science in Wahpeton in January 2016 and graduating in July 2018. Dustin completed his last two classes on-line while he worked full-time as an auto body technician in another community more than 100 miles from the college. Dustin requested a minimal amount in student loans because of the co-enrollment that covered the cost of tools, tuition, books and fees.  
 
Dustin is happily employed full-time as an auto body technician, making $16 per hour with full benefits. He has said many times, that he wouldn’t have been able to survive and thrive without the assistance of his case manager and the financial support of the WIOA Youth and Vocational Rehabilitation programs. 
 
... 
 
Adult Success Stories 
Narumi* was referred to the adult WIOA program for the Pre-CNA class at NDSCS. Narumi had been working as a nail technician and wasn’t making enough money to support herself and her ailing parents. She had limited English skills and wanted to become a CNA. She excelled in Pre-CNA class and finished in February 2018.  
 
During the Pre-CNA class she received assistance with resumes as well as career guidance. She was so excited to be able to move forward in an occupation where she could help her family. Narumi was hired by an assisted living care facility making $16 an hour. Her new employer provided CNA training classes, paid her while she attended the classes with a promise of full time employment when she finished. Narumi is a CNA now and happily provides for her family while proudly taking care of individuals in need. 
 
... 
 
Recently, the Grand Forks Job Service Office staff worked with a local window manufacturing and installation company in Grafton, ND to assist the business in getting a formal apprenticeship set up for Mechatronics Technicians. Once the apprenticeship was formalized, the window company moved two incumbent workers into this position. Both individuals qualified for the WIOA Adult program.   
The two individuals are currently enrolled in the Registered Apprenticeship program. WIOA is assisting with a 6-month OJT for each of these individuals and support services were provided to help with required tools. The related technical instruction was the Manufacturing course at Northland Community and Technical College. 
WIOA funds were used to reimburse the employer for tuition, books and fees for the first two semesters. 
Both individuals had been underemployed. Participating in this apprenticeship will help them work toward self-sufficiency as Journey level workers as Mechatronics Technicians. This will allow them to increase their wages at a much faster rate and will allow them to gain marketable skills that will keep them employed long term.  
 
... 
 
Dislocated Worker Success Stories 
Yasin*, a New American, was eligible for the WIOA dislocated worker program. He attended the CDL program through North Valley Career and Technology Center in Grafton. Support services paid for transportation costs to and from training. 
 
Yasin successfully completed training in August 2018 and earned his CDL. He was hired as a truck driver receiving benefits and earning $0.39/mile.   
*The names followed by asterisks are fictitious. 

 
WIOA Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act PY2017 Annual Report
Job Service North Dakota logo

Attachment A 
Figure 1:  
Labor force participation as a percentage of the civilian noninstitutional population 
 
 
71%

71%

70%

71%

72%

72%

73%

74%

74%

73%

73%

73%

73%

73%

73%

71%

71%

71%

56%

58%

60%

62%

64%

66%

68%

70%

72%

74%

76%

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

Labor Force Participation Rates

United States

North Dakota


Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Current Population Survey 
Table 1: North Dakota Industries with the highest numeric change from 2016-2026. 
Industry Title 
 2016 
 2026 
 Numeric 
 

Total, All Industries 
 480,796 
 535,585 
 54,789 
 
Health Care and Social Assistance 
 58,960 
 70,586 
 11,626 
 
Mining, Quarrying, and Oil and Gas Extraction 
 15,322 
 23,150 
 7,828 
 
Accommodation and Food Services 
 34,855 
 40,519 
 5,664 
 
Transportation and Warehousing 
 20,414 
 24,906 
 4,492 
 
Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services 
 16,450 
 19,994 
 3,544 
 
Finance and Insurance 
 18,047 
 20,732 
 2,685 
 
Manufacturing 
 24,608 
 27,128 
 2,520 
 
Educational Services 
 39,234 
 41,670 
 2,436 
 
Government 
 38,224 
 40,660 
 2,436 
 
Administrative and Support and Waste Management and Remediation Services 
 12,882 
 15,315 
 2,433 
 


 
Source: Job Service North Dakota, Labor Market Information Center 
 


 
Table 2: North Dakota industries with the highest projected percent growth from 2016-2026.   
Industry Title 
 2016 
 2026 
 Percent 
 

Total, All Industries 
 480,796 
 535,585 
 11.40% 
 
Mining, Quarrying, and Oil and Gas Extraction 
 15,322 
 23,150 
 51.10% 
 
Management of Companies and Enterprises 
 5,254 
 6,933 
 32.00% 
 
Transportation and Warehousing 
 20,414 
 24,906 
 22.00% 
 
Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services 
 16,450 
 19,994 
 21.50% 
 
Health Care and Social Assistance 
 58,960 
 70,586 
 19.70% 
 
Real Estate and Rental and Leasing 
 5,133 
 6,113 
 19.10% 
 
Administrative and Support and Waste Management and Remediation Services 
 12,882 
 15,315 
 18.90% 
 
Accommodation and Food Services 
 34,855 
 40,519 
 16.30% 
 
Finance and Insurance 
 18,047 
 20,732 
 14.90% 
 
Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation 
 6,531 
 7,214 
 10.50% 
 


 
Source: Job Service North Dakota, Labor Market Information Center 
 


  
Table 3: North Dakota occupations with the highest projected percent growth from 2016-2026 
Occupational Title 
 201
 202
 Percent 
 

Total, All Occupations 
 480,796 
 535,585 
 11.40% 
 
Architecture and Engineering 
 6,811 
 8,208 
 20.50% 
 
Computer and Mathematical 
 7,591 
 8,994 
 18.50% 
 
Transportation and Material Moving 
 39,575 
 46,714 
 18.00% 
 
Healthcare Practitioners and Technical 
 25,976 
 30,610 
 17.80% 
 
Personal Care and Service 
 21,033 
 24,581 
 16.90% 
 
Construction and Extraction 
 36,071 
 41,909 
 16.20% 
 
Community and Social Service 
 7,494 
 8,683 
 15.90% 
 
Food Preparation and Serving Related 
 35,658 
 41,287 
 15.80% 
 
Business and Financial Operations 
 18,486 
 21,225 
 14.80% 
 
Healthcare Support 
 13,099 
 15,041 
 14.80% 
 
Installation, Maintenance, and Repair 
 23,250 
 26,457 
 13.80% 
 
Building and Grounds Cleaning and Maintenance 
 17,270 
 19,456 
 12.70% 
 
Education, Training, and Library 
 23,816 
 26,200 
 10.00% 
 
Legal 
 3,343 
 3,677 
 10.00% 
 
Production 
 23,324 
 25,549 
 9.50% 
 
Life, Physical, and Social Science 
 3,690 
 4,019 
 8.90% 
 
Protective Service 
 7,261 
 7,792 
 7.30% 
 
Arts, Design, Entertainment, Sports, and Media 
 5,996 
 6,365 
 6.20% 
 
Sales and Related 
 41,519 
 44,090 
 6.20% 
 
Management 
 51,568 
 53,879 
 4.50% 
 
Office and Administrative Support 
 62,388 
 65,088 
 4.30% 
 
Farming, Fishing, and Forestry 
 5,577 
 5,761 
 3.30% 
 


 
Source: Job Service North Dakota, Labor Market Information Center 


 
  
Figure 2: North Dakota total job openings five-year trend 
 
JOB OPENINGS--TOTAL 
 

 
 
 


 

 
Source: Job Service North Dakota, Labor Market Information Center  


FIVE-YEAR TREND 

0

5,000

10,000

15,000

20,000

25,000

Jul-13

Jul-14

Jul-15

Jul-16

Jul-17

Jul-18


 


 
 
  
Figure 3: North Dakota’s total active resumes five-year trend   
 
ACTIVE RESUMÉS
 

 
Source: Job Service North Dakota, Labor Market Information Center  


FIVE-YEAR TREND 

0

2,000

4,000

6,000

8,000

10,000

12,000

Jul-13

Jul-14

Jul-15

Jul-16

Jul-17

Jul-18

In State

Out of State


 
  
  
  
  
  
 


 
  
 
 
 
 

Attachment B 
 
PY 2017 Performance Outcomes 
 
 
  
 Negotiated 
 Actual 
 

Adult 
 Employment Rate 2nd Quarter After Exit 
 76.5% 
 79.0% 
 
 
 Employment Rate 4th Quarter After Exit 
 77.0% 
 80.0% 
 
 
 Median Earnings in the 2nd Quarter After Exit 
 $4,800 
 $6,238 
 
 
 Credential Attainment Rate 
 65.0% 
 58.6% 
 
 
  
  
  
 
Dislocated Worker 
 Employment Rate 2nd Quarter After Exit 
 80.0% 
 93.1% 
 
 
 Employment Rate 4th Quarter After Exit 
 83.0% 
 93.8% 
 
 
 Median Earnings in the 2nd Quarter After Exit 
 $8,000 
 $10,463 
 
 
 Credential Attainment Rate 
 70.0% 
 92.3% 
 
 
  
  
  
 
Youth 
 Education or Training Activities or Employment in the 2nd Quarter After Exit 
 70.0% 
 78.3% 
 
 
 Education or Training Activities or Employment in the 4th Quarter After Exit 
 75.0% 
 73.9% 
 
 
 Credential Attainment Rate 
 75.0% 
 66.7% 
 


 
  
North Dakota met or exceeded all required program performance measures for the WIOA Adult, Dislocated Worker and Youth program, except for the Credential Rate for Youth. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Job Service North Dakota is an equal opportunity employer/program provider. 
 

Auxiliary aids and services are available upon request to individuals with disabilities. 

