 
 
State of New Hampshire  
Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA) 
Annual Report 
 
For the period July 1, 2017 through June 30, 2018  
 
Name and title of authorized official of the Governor: 
 
Dick Anagnost, Chair 
State Workforce Innovation Board  
Telephone: 603-669-6194 
Email: Dick@anagnost.com 
 
Taylor Caswell, Commissioner 
New Hampshire Business and Economic Affairs 
Telephone: 603-271-1572 
Email: Taylor.Caswell@livefree.nh.gov 
 
NH Works is a proud partner of the American Job Center Network. 
 
The State of NH and the NH WORKS One-Stop Partner Agencies Are Equal Opportunity Employers and comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
Auxiliary aids and services are available upon request of individuals with disabilities.  TDD ACCESS: RELAY NH 1-800-735-2964 
INTRODUCTION 
Each state that receives Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA) funds must prepare and submit an Annual Report of performance progress to the Secretary of Labor. As indicated in the Training and Employment Guidance Letter (TEGL) 5-18 (dated November 7, 2018) the following materials respond to the content of the WIOA Annual Stateside Performance Narrative. The narrative report must be submitted by the State Innovation Board by no later than December 3, 2018.  The TEGL requested: 
. Progress towards meeting the strategic vision and goals for the workforce system. 

. Status of waivers that the state has had in place for at least one program year. 

. Identify the two approaches the state has chosen for the Effectiveness in Serving Employers Performance Indicator Pilot.  

. Brief description of  

a. Current or planned evaluation and related research projects including methodologies used; 

b. Efforts to coordinate the development of such projects within WIOA core programs, other state agencies and local boards; 

c. A list of completed evaluation and related reports and links to where they were made accessible to the public electronically; 

d. State efforts to provide data, survey responses, and timely site visits for Federal evaluations and 

e. Any continuous improvement strategies utilizing results from studies and evidence-based practices evaluated. 


. State’s approach to customer satisfaction which may include such information used for one-stop center certification including 

a. The state’s methodologies 

b. Number of individuals/employers who were provided customer satisfaction outreach, the response rate and efforts made to improve the response rate and 

c. The results and whether the results are generalizable to the entire population of customers and 

d. A description of any continuous improvement processes for incorporating the customer satisfaction feedback. 


. Progress made in implementing sector strategies and career pathways.   Discussion may include: business engagement strategies, work-based learning (including apprenticeship), work experiences for youth and adults, transitional jobs, and incumbent worker training strategies and policies in the state. 

. The State’s performance accountability system including 

a. Any specific state performance measures or goals and progress towards meeting them. 



b. Any performance deficiencies on the primary indicators of performance, which may include descriptions of any factors impacting performance. 

c. The State’s common exit policy including which ETA-funded partner programs are included in the states common exit policy. 

d. Negotiated performance levels for local areas for Titles I and III core programs for program years 2016-17. 

e. State’s approach to data validation and ensuring data integrity including a description of methodology of any validation activities that occurred.  


. Activities provided by state funds: 

o Activities provided with the funds reserved by the governor, which can be up to l5% of the state’s allotment.   

o Rapid Response activities and layoff aversion 


. Activities provided under the Wagner-Peyser Act Employment Service 

. National Dislocated Worker Grants awarded to or within the state. 


On behalf of Department of Business and Economic Affairs, Office of Workforce Opportunity and the State Board, we are pleased to offer this Annual Report narrative summarizing our activities consistent with US DOL requirements. 
To our partners, we wish to take this opportunity to acknowledge the dedication and hard work of the staff involved in providing service through the NH Works system. Their ongoing commitment to provide quality services to all who access our services is evident in positive program outcomes, and the high satisfaction ratings from our customers.  
 
  
ANNUAL REPORT NARRATIVE 
For the period July 1, 2017 through June 30, 2018 
NH WORKS SYSTEM, VISION, GOALS, AND STRATEGIES 
The Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA) provided the vision for the initial planning process that included partners, stakeholders, and customers from across the state, focused on creating a demand-driven workforce system that seeks the best possible experience for all business and jobseeker customers, and strives for continuous improvement alignment, and integration of services. The resulting WIOA State Four Year plan was revisited in PY2017 to reinforce and update established goals and system-wide priorities. 
The Workforce Innovation Board’s  long-standing vision has been to ”serve as a catalyst to establish a secure and sustainable workforce that can meet current and future skilled labor needs and provide a competitive advantage for New Hampshire businesses”, with a mission to  “to promote life-long learning by partnering with businesses, agencies, and organizations to bring the state's education, employment and training programs together into a workforce development system that will provide the means for residents of New Hampshire to gain sufficient skills, education, employment and financial independence”. To this end, five system-wide goals were established to guide our work.  
Goal 1: Create a demand-driven workforce development system that bases strategies, services, and investments on a data-informed approach, with a focus on sector strategies. 
Goal 2: Offer flexible training and education opportunities that are aligned to business needs, including the development of career pathways and apprenticeships. 
Goal 3: Increase awareness of services available through the talent development system to support businesses and individuals. 
Goal 4: Streamline access to employment and work-and-learn opportunities. 
Goal 5: Expand communication and collaboration among partner agencies and programs. 
Specific activities that highlight our progress toward achieving these goals include the following: 
. WIOA funding supported efforts to develop sector strategies in Manufacturing, Health Care, Information Technology, Hospitality and Construction.  The use of the Sector Strategies National Emergency Grant and Governor’s Discretionary Funds enabled the NH Sector Partnership Initiative (SPI) to issue Request for Proposals (RFP) and contract with associations in each sector.  The contracts enabled each sector to hire a Sector Adviser, charged with working to organize regional groups, initiate efforts in training, outreach and strategies and expand participant and stakeholders in their respective sectors.  As a result, 1,106 industry interactions have been performed, with 8,158 academic student interactions.  $1 million in SPI federal grant funding served 146 unemployed for training in the sectors, with $4.6 million in annual earnings.  Hundreds of presentations have been presented to active and potential stakeholders.  

. Specific attention was given to aligning WIOA program tools such as the Demand Occupation List and the Eligible Training Provider list to identify and support sector related occupations for the use of WIOA training dollars. One hundred and forty-six unemployed people were trained for sector jobs under the Sector Program Initiative (SPI) grant, which resulted in annual payroll earnings of $6.2 million.  Another 


$1 million in WIOA formula funds was expended serving 246 WIOA eligible participants targeted for sector jobs.  

. Out-of-School Youth (OSY) service providers were encouraged to develop youth training programs in one or more sector.  

o Hitchiner Manufacturing, a large manufacturing company in Milford NH collaborated with the WIOA youth service provider MY TURN to offer an on-site OSY program in manufacturing to train youth for work with local manufacturing companies. 

o  In the Construction Sector, My Turn and Jobs for NH Graduates (JAG) partnered with Career Constructions Days, an event where over 1,000 high school students participated in activities sponsored by employers from across the state. My Turn and lead stakeholders from the construction sector industries are planning future construction training projects and hope to secure a Youth Build grant early next year. A marketing campaign “We Build NH”, produced videos for middle and high school students, and distributed career pathway information. 

o In the technology sector, activities include development of a Girls STEM summer camp with NH-Destination; 3,800 middle and high-school attending activities during Technology Month (November 2018). 

o NH JAG offered an OSY funded training program in Concord, NH specifically designed to promote jobs in Health Care. 


. Within all funding sources, the Career Navigator (Adult and Dislocated Worker Program) and the Youth Specialist (Youth) work with participants to ensure flexible training and opportunities that include career pathways and linkages to apprenticeship.  Tools developed by the NH DOE and the Community College System of New Hampshire, along with targeted labor market and career resources information provided by the Bureau of Labor Market Information, within NH Employment Security, help guide this process. Specifically, the NHDOE College & Career Pathway Model developed by education and workforce partners helps student’s/program participants develop a Personalized Pathway Plan, identifies the core academic courses needed to achieve goals; community based experiences that are available to support goals; and provides information on Career and Technical education programs.  

. The Sector Partnerships Initiative, in conjunction with the Community College System of NH Apprenticeship NH program (funded by a grant from USDOL), held a series of six presentations across the state, attended by over 250 businesses interested in talent recruitment and retention. Each NH Works Partner Agency presented employers (and job seekers) with a review of programs available from each partner, from job training and apprenticeships to vocational rehabilitation services and workshops. 

. The Department of Business and Economic Affairs has contracted with a consultant to recruit job seekers to relocate to New Hampshire. The recruitment efforts include descriptions of New Hampshire’s economic development and lifestyle advantages on social media and other channels. 

. The state’s Interagency Business Team (IBT), led by the Division of Economic Development continues to coordinate efforts to streamline business services and jointly track business contacts in an effort to leverage resources available to the business community and minimize redundancy. Two new brochures, for employer services and job seeker opportunities have been printed and distributed at all NH Works office throughout the state, and employer service representatives distribute to employers at meetings and job fairs. 


. Job Fairs are another strategy employed to increase awareness of services available through the talent development system to support businesses and individuals.  NH Employment Security is the lead agency for coordinating Job Fairs throughout the state.  Each year twelve or more job fairs are held bringing hundreds of employers and unemployed workers together. Partner agencies use these opportunities to educate employers and workers alike on the vast array of services available to them from immediate job placement services to training services to incumbent worker and business development services.  

. Communication and collaboration has always been and continues to be strength of New Hampshire’s workforce system.  Established partner committees, including the Workforce Innovation Board, NH Works Interagency Directors Group, Professional Development Team, Interagency Business Team, as well as local NH Works Partner meetings, continue to work together to offer the highest quality services to those we are funded to serve.  


System Waivers Under WIOA  
The US Department of Labor identifies the Secretary of Labor's waiver authority under the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA) as a tool to promote workforce system innovation and focus on outcomes.  That is, states may request exemption from certain funding and/or programmatic requirements if it is determined that such requirements might impede the State’s ability to achieve success, or conversely improve the State’s ability to succeed.  Examples of typical waivers include the requirement to expend 75% of youth funds on out-of-school youth, annual system evaluation and/or eligible training provider reporting requirements.  NH did not seek nor implement any waivers in PY17. However, a waiver for the three requirements listed above are currently under review, and we hope to have them approved for implementation in PY18. 
Effectiveness in Serving Employers  
For the purpose of this annual report, we are required to identify the two approaches the state has chosen for the “Effectiveness in Serving Employers Performance Indicator Pilot” as defined by US DOL.  The two measures applicable in New Hampshire are the “Repeat Business Customers Rate” and the “Employer Penetration Rate”, which includes information and support as well as workforce recruitment assistance.  NH Employment Security tracks employer contacts with the NH Works offices throughout the state. Program year 2017 represents the first year in which these WIOA employer performance measures were calculated, with 74.2% of businesses receiving services more than once (i.e., 1,135 out of 1,529), and an Employer Penetration rate of  
2.9% (i.e.1,529 out of 52,146). We consider both of these outcomes to be commendable in year of the one the lowest unemployment rates in history, and the minimal amount of federal funding NH receives to provide these services.  
Other measures for assessing the effectiveness of services to business may include training services such as on-the-job-training, incumbent worker training, rapid response services and employers engaged in economic development and planning. Since 2010, we have placed over one thousand customers in On-the-Job Trainings (OJT), 80 of which were placed in PY 2017.  NH has been recognized nationally for its success in accomplishing such a high rate of OJT placements, which requires strong working relationships with businesses to ensure that customers are placed in OJT opportunities that will lead to stable and long-term employment.  As a result, 86% of customers who entered OJTs remained employed one year after exiting the program.  The State’s Job Training Grant awarded contracts to 66 companies during program year 2017, leveraging in excess of 
$856,722 in matching funds for a total of $1,696,510 in training dollars to upskill 1,979 workers at a cost of $850 per trainee; a cost effective and efficient way for businesses to retain their current workforce.  However, even in strong economy there are job losses.  The State’s Rapid Response team worked with 20 companies last year to assist them with providing access to services for 1,549 workers affected by layoffs. To foster meaningful and consistent employer engagement, campaigns such as the Governor’s “100 businesses in 100 days” and the Peak Workforce Initiative led by the Commissioner of Business and Economic Affairs, which goals include: 1. realign and regulate state programs 2. diversify NH’s workforce 3. build new Business/Academic/State Alliance and 4. launch and maintain a digital media talent attraction campaign, lead the way in creating opportunities for the business community to learn about, engage in and leverage resources designed to promote a thriving business environment for the citizens of New Hampshire.  
System Evaluation 
System evaluation is woven into the operational practices of partners and is ongoing to ensure we continue to offer quality services that are in compliance with state and federal requirements.  System partners meet regularly to assess program effectiveness through the review of new and current programs to promote efficiencies, coordination and reduce duplication of services; discussion of key monitoring findings; review of best practices internal and from other states; review of performance outcomes for core WIOA programs; and share formal and informal customer satisfaction results in an effort to inform system change.  
Specific system evaluations for PY2017 include the following: 
. In July 2017 the NHES Economic and Labor Market Information Bureau (ELMI) published a return on investment(ROI) report for WIOA based on an Input/Output Model to estimate the impact of WIOA expenditures on New Hampshire using the REMI PI+ model developed by Regional Economic Models, Inc. The model was calibrated to New Hampshire for policy analysis and forecasting. ELMI modeled WIOA expenditures as State Government Spending. The economic simulation used the average WIOA expenditures for 2015-16 and 2016-17 for WIOA Adult, Dislocated Worker, Wagner Peyser and Vocational Rehabilitation, for a total expenditure input of $28,091,110 for 2016. The ROI results are outlined below. 

o 606 jobs are supported by WIOA expenditures 

o $44.4 million (in 2016 dollars) worth of GDP (Gross Domestic Product) was generated due to WIOA expenditures 

. That means that for every $1.00 of WIOA expenditures, Gross Domestic Product increases by $1.56  


o $70.4 million (in 2016 dollars) worth of total output was generated due to WIOA expenditures 

. That means that for every $1.00 of WIOA expenditures, total production, including intermediate goods and services, increases by $2.51  



. In PY17, the Office of Workforce Opportunity in conjunction with the NH Works Partners (Southern NH Services, Department of Education, NH Employment Security, and Vocational Rehabilitation) procured the services of PowerNotes, LLC to conduct a formal evaluation of our NH Works Resource Center services and the effectiveness of local partner relationships. The purpose of the evaluation was to assess current services and recommend continuous improvement as needed. PowerNotes, LLC, 


spent time with state and local staff, specifically in the NH Works offices in Concord, Nashua, and Somersworth. The goal was to determine to what extent NH Works is “a demand-driven workforce development system that bases strategies, services and investments on a data-informed approach with a focus on sector strategies”.  Recommendations from the ensuing report highlighted the need for better communication from the state to the local offices regarding new initiatives, directives and best practices; coordinated information and marketing materials to give the same look to the NH Works system partner services (e.g., coordinated colors, shapes, print and logos); better organized bulletin boards and brochure/information to reduce “clutter look”; customer flow can be challenging and sometimes confusing to the customer and upfront screening and referral processes are not always seamless across access points; and better coordination of orientations to include more partner participation.  


Report results were shared with the NH Works Interagency Directors Group for follow up.  In addition, Mary Ann Lawrence of PowerNotes (i.e. the evaluator) was the keynote speaker at the annual NH Works Conference for partner staff in May, 2018, during which she shared results and introduced strategies for improvement.  She also facilitated several topic-related workshops at the conference, reinforcing best practices for continuous improvement.   A copy of the report may be found at the NH Works website at www.nhworks.org. 
. Program Monitoring, including federal reviews are an important component of system evaluation for compliance with WIOA regulations, as well as State policy and procedures for program and financial management. Program Year 2017 WIOA monitoring activities included the following major activities.  

o A federal review of the Senior Community Services Employment Program occurred in September, 2017. There were neither major corrective action issues nor any disallowed costs. There was one finding (Community Action Program of Belknap-Merrimack Counties, Inc. (CAP-BMC) provides the statement, “A copy of the Grievance and Appeal Procedure will be attached to the termination letter”, on page four of the Participant Termination Policy and Procedures’ which has sense been resolved. 

o OWO conducted separate monitoring activities of which 15 were on-site reviews, and 39 were desk reviews.   Sub-recipients (i.e., SNHS, Inc. and NH DOE) submitted 34 reports related to local monitoring activities for OWO review. There no major corrective action issues or findings of disallowed costs. 

o PY 2017 was a transition year for Data Validation and USDOL did not require formal reporting for WIOA Title I programs (adult, dislocated worker, youth); OWO conducted an informal review; reports were submitted in December 2016.  SCSEP data validation was completed in June, 2018.  

o Equal Opportunity Monitoring was incorporated into the on-site reviews for each sub-recipient.  In addition, OWO conducted an EO analysis of participant data to assess for potential discrimination. 



Any corrective action items identified through the monitoring process at either the state or local level have been fully resolved. Monitoring reports are reviewed and approved by the State Workforce Innovation Board annually.  
Customer Satisfaction 
Semi-annually customer satisfaction surveys are administered to NH Works customers Each NH Works Center provides new customers with a Customer Satisfaction Survey upon entering the Center for the period of one month, twice a year.   In PY17, 91% of the customers who completed a survey rated their local NH Works office very good to excellent overall.  
Questions Yes No Other 
Did we provide you with the information you were looking for?   2624 25 30 
Did we explain our services and/or programs to your satisfaction?   2645 11 23 
Is there anything else that we could have done for you that was not offered?  443 2162 74 
 
 
Adult Participant/Dislocated Worker Customer Satisfaction Results:  In PY 17, a new survey tool was updated to increase the overall number of customers who completed the survey.   The tool consists of seven questions and is administered when the participant exits the program, versus 90 days later when an exit is recorded in the system. Participant were asked to rate their experience in response to the following questions:  
• Overall satisfaction with the WIOA services you received at the NH Works office. 

• Considering all of the expectations you may have had about the services offered, to what extent did the services you received meet your expectations. 

• Thinking back on the WIOA services you received at the NH Works office, how helpful would you say the services you received were in preparing you for finding employment? 

• Now think of the ideal program for people in your circumstances. How well do you think the services you received compare with the ideal set of services? 

• Please select the answer below that best describes your current employment status. 

• How would you rate the quality of the help you received from your employment counselor? 

• If you need employment and training services in the future, how likely is it that you would use the services offered at the NH Works office? 


Fifty-four percent of participants exiting the program completed a survey.  Of the 334 surveys completed, 89% of the customers reported to be “very satisfied” with the level of service they received. Eighty- one percent (81%) of the customers reported that the services offered exceeded their expectations.   And, when asked about the quality of help that they received from their Career Navigator, 86% of the customers answered “Helpful-Very Helpful”.  Results from these customer satisfaction results are review by local program management staff and used to identify areas where improvement may be needed.  Overall Satisfaction  Poor Fair Good Very Good Excellent Blank 
 6 17 236 860 1518 42 

Business Customer Satisfaction Results:  Employer surveys were administered to companies participating in Employer Seminars.  Two hundred and fourteen (214) companies participated and all found the Employer Seminars useful and all said they would participate in another employer seminar. Most participants were satisfied with the length the seminar (i.e., 186 good, 3 too long and 1 too short).  Responses to the four open-ended questions are as follows: 
What did you find most useful? Seventy-eight company representatives shared what they liked about the seminar. Responses included: “learning about the many programs the state offers”, “other services for employees”, “description of available resources”, “Job Match/Return to Work”, Economic Development piece on sector partners”, “All the resources”,  “Learning the programs”, “Many useful programs”, “Learning about different programs”, “Presentations”, “Various programs for high school and vets”, “new places to find employees”, “learning about programs”, “training opportunities”, “the resources”, “learning about available programs”, “many programs available”, and “information about grants”.  
 
Any questions or concerns that need more clarification? Most participants said no but a few offered these responses “I am going to find out more about sector partners”, “It was a lot of information” I do but a NH W/C rep will contact me” “Laws regarding cell phones during worktime” and “More basics on WC” 
 
How can we make this program better? Most respondents offered positive words of support and felt the seminars were well done.  Suggestions for improvement included: box lunch: coffee: business cards: info for all speakers: an intro for everybody: more written resources to take away: handouts: how to register for programs: tips on obtaining employees not just resources: examples attractive ads or job fairs: place examples within slideshows: interactive examples: tables for note taking: a mid meeting break: more chairs, more air flow, need a break every hour: Its good. maybe louder speakers: maybe a little longer: more time for labor law: more Q and A time: add in topics on legal backgrounds and veteran employment: on site instruction at a company; slow down: maybe get the audience more involved. 
 
What other issues or topics would you like to see addressed in future seminars? Responses included:  “Labor Laws, Worker's Compensation, Hiring Incentives, Legal Questions, State Economy, Economic Expansion, Positive Thinking, Attitudes and Behaviors, Burnout,  Constructive Confrontation, Sexual Harassment, Customer Service Training, Payroll Tax”, “Hiring Incentives, Respect in the Workplace”, “Positive Thinking, OJT, Attitudes and Behaviors”, “Labor Laws, Legal Questions, Positive Thinking, Beyond the Obvious, Customer Service Training, Sexual Harassment, Respect in the Workplace, Burnout”, and “Labor Laws, Worker's Compensation, Legal Questions, State Economy, Economic Expansion.  
Sector Strategies/Career Pathways 
The Sector Partnerships Initiative (SPI) was initiated by the NH Works System to establish a pipeline of skilled and educated workers for the major economic sectors of New Hampshire. In addition, the SPI was designed to assist job seekers find appropriate education and training that provides them with productive career paths. 
With the assistance of an USDOL/ETA Sector Partnerships National Emergency Grant (SP NEG) grant, New Hampshire’s SPI was created in December 2017. Jobs for the Future (JFF), a nationally-known consultant experienced in helping to formulate strategic partnerships, was chosen following a Request for Proposals to assist in development of SPI. Extensive data of state state’s economy helped determine which sectors to choose as a starting point for SPI. Five sectors have been launched to date – manufacturing; hospitality; 
healthcare; technology; and the latest sector, construction. Each of the five sectors has an advisory board which meets regularly, as well as regional groups, and a sector adviser who assists in finding and coordinating resources needed by the sector. Additional funds from the WIOA Governor’s Discretionary Funds established the hiring of five Sector Advisers. 
Each of the five sectors has established goals and measureable results. 
Construction: The construction sector created a sector advisory group, identified its goals and launched the sector in September 2018. It is working closely with the OWO’s two youth groups (MY TURN and NHJAG). It is working on a YOUTH BUILD grant opportunity; has developed a series of video, print and social media campaigns to attract and recruit youth; has partnered to produce Construction Career Days where 1,500 high school students visit a fairground to participate with construction tools and machinery; partnered with Career and Technical Educational facilities (CTE); partnered with a middle school to establish a model career course in construction; is partnering with Boy and Girl Scout organizations statewide in Merit Badge/Career Development programs. 
Healthcare: Has developed regional healthcare collaborative; expanded career pathway programs with Vermont Technical College for LPNs; collaborated with Governor’s Scholarship Programs to fund training; participated in workshops with the NH Career and Technical Educators Annual Conference; produced a monthly newsletter to 385 stakeholders; participated with hearings held by US Representative Annie Kuster; worked on license reciprocity for RN, LPN and allied professionals, as well as temporary licensing for nursing professionals. 
Hospitality: The Sector Initiative accomplishments include: establishment of a Hospitality Job Bank with the NH Lodging & Restaurant Association; collaboration with Ascentria Health Care for New Americans and Immigrants; coordinated the first Hospitality Month, when students visit hospitality venues and learn about career paths; worked with the Young Women’s Leadership Academy; established new Certificate Programs in Hospitality Career Pathways with Granite State College; formed a partnership with the NH Job Corps; hosted Hospitality Boot camps with the Adult Learning Center; distributes a newsletter to 84 stakeholders. 
Technology: Created a Code Exploration Course for Adult Learning Centers; partnered with Intelitek (manufacturer of hardware and training courses); created the Manchester Millyard Roundtable; partnered with the Girls STEM Summer Camp; 69 unemployed workers are now employed in the technology sector with an annual payroll of $3.4 million. 
Manufacturing: Helped coordinate the Littleton CTE Machining Program; Recreated the Nashua High School Machining Program; partnered in the creation of the Rochester High School Composites Program; collaborate with the Seacoast Manufacturing Exchange; 1,900 students participated in the 11th annual Manufacturing Month; 95% increase in stakeholder count, trained 2,260 manufacturing employees through the Job Training Fund. 
To date, over 1,100 industry interactions have been made, with an additional 8,158 interactions with academic institution and students. SPI has been presented at dozens of agencies, associations and collaborative working on workforce development. Funding to support training for jobs in sector industries comes from a variety of funding streams, such as but not limited to the following:  
. The US DOL Sector Partnership (SP) NEG grant for sector strategies helped the Office of Workforce Opportunity place 146 unemployed clients into training programs in four of the five sectors. The $1-million-dollar investment of federal funds to support the state’s sector initiative resulted in annual earnings of $6.2 million. 

. Seventy thousand dollars of dislocated worker funds was set-aside to assist incumbent workers gain new skills involved five manufacturers and 120 workers being trained. 

. Over one million dollars in WIOA funds were used to train 246 workers into sectors. 

. The state-based Job Training program is a matching grant program for training incumbent workers. Focusing on employers in the sectors, $820,481 was invested in sector training for workers, primarily in manufacturing.  


Identifying existing and creating new career pathways is at the heart of all the work being done by sector partners. As evident in summary of sector activities outline above much work is being done to link employers, educators and workforce development practitioners to develop new opportunities that facilitate access to training and advancement.  Like the workforce professionals discussed earlier in this report, Sector Advisors utilize the tools developed by the NH DOE and the Community College System of New Hampshire, labor market bureau career resources information to educate human resource professions and other business leaders about existing pathways, and to identify gaps that need to be addressed to ensure workers have the educational resources needed to succeed.  
Beginning in PY2018 sustainability plans were developed for each of the sectors, and it is anticipated that federal funding will be reduced by sixty percent by June 2019, with industries from each of the sectors (in additional to other private funding sources) contributing to the operating costs of each sector.  
Performance Accountability 
Participant Performance Goals and Outcomes: The U.S. Department of Labor (USDOL) requires the reporting of annual performance outcomes/goals for each funding source. In PY2017 the WIOA program was responsible for achieving performance goals, as follows for Adult, Dislocated Worker, Youth and National Dislocated Worker grants: Employment Rate Second Quarter After Exit; Median Earnings; Employment Rate Fourth Quarter After Exit; and Credential Rate. Two additional performance goals, effectiveness in serving employers and measurable skills gains, were considered “baseline” for reporting purposes in PY17, which means specific outcome goals for these two measures will be determined at a later date.  
According to US DOL policy, a goal is considered “met” if the state achieves 80% of an approved target goal. To “exceed” a goal, performance must be at 100% of the negotiated goal; and a failed or “not met” goal is defined as any performance below 80% of the measure. In PY2017, New Hampshire met all fifteen established program goals for WIOA Title I programs and exceeded twelve goals. (A complete summary of goals and performance outcomes for PY17 can be viewed in Appendix A – WIOA Performance at a Glance (July 1, 2017 – June 30, 2018) 
  
 
The Wagner-Peyser program (i.e., NH Employment Security labor exchange program) also met all of their goals in PY17.  This information is measured against all individuals registered in the State’s job match system 
 
Goal Target Goal Actual Performance 
Employment (Second Quarter after Exit)  66% 66.7% 
Employment (Fourth Quarter after Exit) 78% 64% 
Median Earnings $6,246 $6,127 
Effectiveness in Serving Employers Baseline Baseline 
 
 
In addition to the performance outcomes required by USDOL, the SWIB manages financial performance measures to ensure adequate numbers of people are served, and that funds are expended consistent with approved costs. Three-hundred, twenty-five individuals were enrolled for services in the adult funding source during PY17.  All participants received career services and 245 enrolled in training (75%), at a cost per of $1,470 for career services and $4,231 for training services. Thirty-eight percent of those enrolled were low-income single parents and over 30% identified as experiences a significant barrier to employment such as being an English Language Learner, having Low Levels of Literacy and/or experiencing Cultural Barriers. 
 
The Dislocated Worker program served 473 people, with 326 (69%) enrolled in training. The cost per for career services was $1,155, just slightly lower than the cost for adult enrollments.  And, the cost per training was $3,666. Of particular note is that 36% of dislocated workers enrolled during PY17 were 55 years of age or older. 
 
The WIOA youth program which includes both in-school youth and out-of-school youth between the ages of 16 and 24 years, had 341 youth enrolled during PY17.   The majority of youth are 18-24 years of age, which is reflective of the requirement that 75% of WIOA youth expenditures be for out-of-school youth programs. Two-hundred, eighty-three (283) youth (91%) qualified as low-income, and 50% of youth enrolled in the WIOA youth program identified as an “individual with a disability”.  Youth services are designed as comprehensive services, with a focus on barrier resolution, support services and other intense one-on-one services that are reported as “career services”.  This explains why the cost per for career services for the youth program (i.e., $8,645) is significantly higher than that of the adult and/or dislocated worker program.   Conversely, less funding for formal training (e.g., individual training accounts and/or on-the-job training) is available through the WIOA youth program; the cost per training for youth in PY17 was $1,362, but we anticipate to see these costs go up as the design of youth programs partner with local businesses to incorporate more formal training opportunities, particularly in sector industries.  
 
WIOA requires WIOA program administrators to have an exit policy for participants. Currently there is an exit policy for dually enrolled clients enrolled in WIOA Adult and Youth programming:   For clients that are dually enrolled, clients will be provided services by both funding streams until client has completed services (including training) in both funding streams.  When that is achieved, the client can be exited on the same date from both programs.  
WIOA also requires states to perform Data Validation, that is a process by which the state “validates” that 
the information recorded for data reporting purposes is accurate.   Although no federal data validation review occurred in PY17 as the reporting system transitioned from WIA to WIOA, our WIOA sub-recipients, Southern NH Services (Adult and Dislocated Worker Funding) and NH Department of Education (Youth Funding) conducted internal data validation reviews, both as part of the regular monitoring as well as specific data validation exercise.   The process entailed comparing source documents with the documentation submitted in our E-Teams Case Management System as well as ensuring that notes and Employability Plans data coincided.  The data would later be transferred to US DOL as part of the PIRL. 
  
Governor’s Reserve Funds 
In PY 17 Governor’s Reserve Funds were contracted to “Sector Partnership Initiatives” (SPI) that are regional, employer-driven partnerships of industry, education and training, and other stakeholders that focus on the workforce needs of key industries in a regional labor market.  Section initiatives rely on industry champions to elevate awareness and creditability to the program.  Workforce intermediaries (or advisers) are also used to engage employers and other key stakeholders; to develop expertise in the industry of focus; and to coordination information and resources to develop and implement effective and coordinate workforce solutions.  
Building on the foundation work of the SPI and other key stakeholders, the adviser works closely with the SPI project director and DBEA staff to establish a framework of operation that is aligned with the following Business and Economic Affairs’ overarching approach to “Talent Attraction”; SPI team outreach campaign with Cookson Communications; and the NH Works American Job Centers - i.e., retaining existing workers/companies; attract new workers/companies; create a pipeline of skilled workers and expand the skills of current workers to meet new industry needs. 
A primary function of the adviser is to identify, document, coordinate, and expand as appropriate, the existing resources for addressing current workforce needs, and to create new opportunities to address deficiencies.  
Contracts were developed with each of the following organizations for the services of an intermediary to assist in achieving Sector Strategy goals.  
Contracts Period Purpose 
Business and Industry Association 12/20/17-12/09/18 Infrastructure Sector Intermediary Services 
Community College System of NH - SPI 07/01/18 -6/30/19 Sector Project Manager  
Cookson Strategies, Corp 11/01/17-10/31/18 Sector Outreach Campaign 
NH Health Care Association 07/01/17-12/18/18 Health Sector Intermediary  
NH High Tech Council 12/06/17-12/09/18 Technology Sector Intermediary  
NH Lodging and Restaurant Association 12/20/17-12/20/18 Hospitality Sector Intermediary 
Manufacturing Employer Partnership  12/06/17-12/09/18 Manufacturing Sector Intermediary  
Rapid Response 
Addressing employer and worker needs is most crucial when confronting reductions in workforce or a company closure. The NH Works partner agencies, operating under a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU), have developed a cohesive and comprehensive Rapid Response system that quickly reacts to 
both employer and worker needs in such events. Learning about a layoff or closure can come from a variety of sources, including media, UI claims, rumor, company contact, or Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification Act (WARN) notices. Upon confirmation of such an event, a team from the NH Works partner agencies in any of the twelve (12) NH Works Centers is formed for the purpose of assisting the employer and workforce. Contact is made with the employer, and with their assistance, the local team of partner agencies arrange to meet the workers on, or off-site as quickly as possible. 
The Division of Economic Development (DED) staff serves as the state lead, coordinating local dislocated worker team activities. Local teams include representation from each of the primary NH Works system partners (e.g., NH Employment Security (ES/UI/Trade Act); NH Department of Health and Human Services (SNAP, TANF, Medicaid); NH Vocational Rehabilitation (VR); Community Action Program (WIOA Adult/DW, Fuel Assistance, WIC, etc.); and others as determined necessary).  
Rapid Response is also an effective employer program because it helps the employer deal with the trauma of large layoffs and/or closure. Affected workers may be able, through the coordinated efforts of the Rapid Response team, to immediately relocate to existing positions in companies needing their skills. Job Fairs and Resource Fairs assist in re-employment efforts, along with the individual assistance provided by the partner agencies. 
With New Hampshire’s economy healthy and growing, the number of Rapid Response events has been reduced dramatically since the Great Recession. But, “churning” of companies, through mergers or unexpected circumstances, keeps Rapid Response teams throughout the State busy. Suggesting possible alternatives to layoffs to employers, delivering Rapid Response Guides for dislocated workers, and performing outreach to businesses is part of a layoff aversion effort to help companies experiencing difficulties. Some employers decline to accept the offer of Rapid Response services for its employees due to security reasons. Other employers do not respond to the offer to assist, but the Division of Economic Business Specialists who lead the 12 Rapid Response local teams have been successful in reaching most employers unaware of the services offered through Rapid Response. The following chart shows the type of industries the Rapid Response teams worked with over the past year, and the number of people affected. 
Type of Industry Companies Employees Displaced 
Manufacturing 11 465 
Healthcare 2 38 
Energy 1 8 
Financial Services 1 400 
Retail 4 593 
Construction 1 45 
Totals 20 1,549 
 
Wagner-Peyser Act Employment Service Activities 
Wagner-Peyser funds, administered by the NH Department of Employment Security, are used to support staff providing direct customer service and referrals in each the 12 NH Works Centers.  NH Works resource centers are staffed by Wagner-Peyser i.e., Employment Service staff who assist individuals in accessing re-employment information and services, and to register in the state’s job match system.  During the twelve-month period of July 1, 2016 through June 30, 2017, 17,213 reportable individuals accessed services through 
the NH works offices.  In addition, Employment Security (ES) staff conduct regular and ongoing outreach to target populations, including Veterans, individuals in recovery, and offenders (particularly those in the county jails) and periodically offer workshops on relevant re-employment topics such as interviewing and resume writing.  ES staff serve as the “front door” for access to the 12 NH Works centers, often the first person to greet staff, assess their needs and make referrals for additional services, as needed. 
Employment Security staff outreach to employers to promote employment opportunities; both subsidized and unsubsidized.  They provide a variety of business services, including but not limited to: posting jobs in the state’s job match system; assisting with on-site recruitment; the provision of labor-related and employment and training information; and access to job training options (i.e., OJT, Job Training Grant, work experience, return to work, etc.).  As mentioned earlier in this report, NH Employment Security hosts labor-law seminars for employers and is the primary entity for organizing and hosting job fairs throughout the year, throughout the state.   Last year and into this year, NHES adopted a targeted job fair approach, hosting job fair events designed to attract specific job hunters i.e., recruiting from the Community College and/ or State University systems, job fairs for mature workers, and/or job fairs for veterans. 
National Dislocated Worker Grants 
In PY17, New Hampshire was fortunate enough to continue a National Emergency Grants for the Sector Partnership Initiative that was described earlier.  The New Hampshire Sector Partnerships Initiative (SPI) project has accomplished much since the project began in June of 2015.  The activities were planned and managed in four (4) distinct phases: Data Analysis, Workforce Development Planning, Industry Engagement and Launch Meetings and Toolkit Development for Sustainability.  Defined project goals were achieved by the time the grant ended in June 2018.  The foundation established as a result of this grant opportunity continues to support stakeholders to this initiative as the work continues with sector champions and the sector advisors leading the way. For more information visit the NH Sector Partnership website at  https://nhsectorpartners.org/industries/ , or the NH Works website at www.nhworks.org. 
In addition, PY17 was the third year of a Dislocated Worker National Reserve Implementation Grant. The use of these funds was limited to activities directly related to the full implementation of WIOA. In PY funds remaining in this grant were used to cover the costs associated with activities such as the following 1) The statewide NH Works Conference attended by the NH Work partners’ staff, 2) Rapid Response staff to attend the Rapid Response Summit in Massachusetts, and 3) an EO Officer to attend the DOL Civil Rights Equal Opportunity training in Washington DC. 
  
Success Stories - Caroline was 56 years old when she was enrolled into the WIOA Program. At the time of enrollment, she had been out of work for over a year. She is divorced and supporting herself while residing in her son’s basement in Hudson, NH. Caroline was initially seeking help with the numerous barriers she was facing including long-term unemployment, discrimination due to age and gender in male dominated career choice, lack of college degree and outdated IT skills and certifications.  
Seeing how Caroline had over 17 years of experience in IT positions, we decided it would be best for her to continue on this career path. Together, Caroline and her Career Navigator worked to explore the current labor market for open IT positions that would provide enough income for her to survive. We found many open IT jobs, and she was most interested in the IT Security positions as there were many local openings with high wage potential. We analyzed the job ads relating to IT security and found that advanced training would be required for her to fill holes in her skillset so that she could regain employment in the IT sector. 
Contact information was given to Caroline for approved training centers offering the latest IT training. She visited local schools and decided to pursue the Network Security & Computer Forensics training program at New Horizons. The skills that are taught in the noted training are skills that are highly sought after by employers looking to fill IT Cybersecurity positions so Caroline decided to move full speed ahead with the training. She studied hard over the next couple of months and passed the Certified Information Systems Security Professional (CISSP) exam. 
With all of her new skills and credentials from the training at New Horizons she participated in an aggressive job search for IT security work. She got many calls and interviews with local employers and ultimately accepted an offer made by PCI Strategic Management. She started this new job on 04/02/2018 working as Information Systems Security Officer. She would not have secured the position if she didn’t complete the WIOA funded training at New Horizons. She is still employed and earning $40.87 per hour.  
Caroline’s experience with WIOA and the training vendor has been positive. She reports that “The training and certifications increased my salary $20,000 per year. Jill and Lynn (at New Horizons) were wonderful and extremely helpful.” After securing the position with PCI Strategic Management she sent along a note stating “Thank-you Nichole and NHES/NH Works and the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act program for making this training possible!”  
 
CHAD is a 45-year-old single male who learned about the WIOA program while exploring CDL training at the Commercial Driving School in Concord, NH. Chad was released from prison July 22nd, 2017 where he spent 3 years incarcerated, charged with a felony. 
He was released October 2nd, 2017 from the Hampshire House (Reentry Center) where he resided since July 22nd, 2017. Prior to incarceration, Chad was an Electrician for 14 years. His license has since expired.  
Chad was made eligible for WIOA on November 1st, 2017. Chad was unemployed and seeking fulltime employment. He was looking for assistance with training costs, job search and resume development. He received some career counseling at Hampshire House where he identified truck driving as a good career choice having a felony on his record. He recently applied for Food Stamps and is pending a determination. He was surviving with help from family and friends while he worked to get back on his feet financially. Through conducting labor market research with local truck driving companies, career counseling, and assessments it 
was determined that becoming a CDL-A Truck driver was a great career choice for Chad. He applied to the Commercial Driving School and got accepted into the CDL-A class. With no income, Chad has no way of paying for this course, but WIOA was able to assist.  
Chad consistently received positive remarks on his timesheet and maintained regular communication with WIOA. He completed the CDL-A training course on December 14th, 2017 and hit the ground running.  He had been networking with employers that visited his class, aggressively job searching and started getting multiple interviews. WIOA assisted Chad with targeting felon friendly employers. 
Chad was able to secure employment as a CDL-A Doubles Driver with Performance Food Group, where he started working fulltime and making $27.00 per hour with full benefits. 
Chad was very pleased with the outcome, assistance and support he received through WIOA and the ability to start his new career at a livable wage.  
During Chad’s first quarterly follow up in April, 2018 he was doing very well and had just received a 3% raise.  
MICHAEL was referred by NH Employment Security to SCSEP in October 2017.  Recently divorced and making the move from New York to New Hampshire to be closer to his son attending college at Southern New Hampshire University, NM was finding it difficult to find employment.  
Having worked in the insurance industry for 20+ years, NM had knowledge and experience in many areas including Claims Representative, Claims Adjuster, Direct Repair Coordinator and Sales Specialist.  He was concerned that being age 60 may be a contributing factor to the lack of job offers in his field of expertise.  
Having an interest in customer service, NM was assigned to host training site NH Employment Security as a Front Desk Clerk.  His upbeat personality, attention to detail and excellent listening skills were quickly noticed by management.  NM was encouraged to apply for a position that became available in March of 2018 at his SCSEP host training site.  
NM successfully interviewed for the position and was hired full time on 4/27/18 as a Clerk Interviewer earning $14.50 per hour.  Follow-up on the unsubsidized placement in September of 2018 confirmed that NM had recently been promoted to a new position - Employer Services Representative and received an increase of $4.00 per hour. 
HANNAH came to the Jobs for New Hampshire Graduates program less than a year ago. When she first started working with NH-JAG she had explained that her entire family moved to the Mid-West spontaneously, leaving her here in New Hampshire alone. This occurrence happened while Hannah was supposed to be finishing high school. The stress, demands and pressures of life on her own ultimately led to her dropping out. In order to pay her rent, Hannah was working at a fast food chain sometimes putting in overtime hours well above a normal full time job. When meeting with NH-JAG staff, she often vented about the toxic work environment and mental stress attained from the negative work culture she existed in. Hannah expressed a strong desire to move on to a better work environment and was thinking ahead and planning to do so. In order to leave her current job, she needed to find another position to replace it. Hannah ultimately wanted a career job. She aspired to feel proud of her job title. From the very start Hannah displayed an unparalleled loyalty and dedication to success. These traits assured NH-JAG of Hannah’s ability to excel in the program.  
In the program, Hannah showed commitment and devotion to learning. Halfway through her course, she experienced moments of self- doubt. Through her relationship with NH-JAG staff she started practicing self- care and stress management mechanisms that aided her in completing her LNA program, attaining a LNA license and ultimately completing her high school equivalency – “HISET.” The day she was able to leave her dead end job indefinitely was a day of ultimate celebration and joy. Hannah is now employed full time at NH-
JAG’s clinical partner site Havenwood-Heritage Heights. When NH-JAG assisted Hannah in choosing benefits, this was a huge milestone for Hannah. She had finally realized she met her goal of obtaining a career position. She is an employee who wears her name badge proud, goes above and beyond, always asks for overtime and seeks ways to continually improve. 
 
  
APPENDIX A -WIOA Title I Performance at a Glance (July 1, 2017 – June 30, 2018) 
Cumulative Time Period Performance Item Program Group Program To Date PY 2017 Goa lRate Numerator 
Denominator 100% 80% 
Jul 1, 2016 - Jun 30, 2017 Employment Rate Second Quarter After Exit Adults 83.1% 211 75.0% 60.0%254 
Dislocated Workers 84.8% 385 86.0% 68.8%454 
National Dislocated Worker Grants 81.7% 161 86.0% 68.8%197 
Youth (Employment, Education or Training Placement Rate) 84.8% 151 63.0% 50.4%178   
Jul 1, 2016 - Jun 30, 2017 Median Earnings Adults $5,934  $5,000  $4,000 
Dislocated Workers $9,186  $7,500  $6,000 
National Dislocated Worker Grants $10,000  $7,500  $6,000 
Jul 1, 2016 - Dec 31, 2016 Employment Rate Fourth Quarter After Exit Adults 71.8% 61 72.0% 57.6%85 
Dislocated Workers 87.7% 178 85.0% 68.0%203 
National Dislocated Worker Grants 86.0% 74 85.0% 68.0%86 
Youth (Employment, Education or Training Placement Rate) 81.8% 27 59.0% 47.2%33   
Jul 1, 2016 - Dec 31, 2016 Credential Rate Adults 93.8% 30 53.0% 42.4%32 
Dislocated Workers 88.2% 90 63.5% 50.8%102 
National Dislocated Worker Grants 92.7% 51 63.5% 50.8%55 
Youth   69.2% 9 60.5% 50.8%13 
 

