 
Graphic element unrelated to the report
Graphic element unrelated to the report
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WIOA PY2017 
  
Narrative Performance Report  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 





Image result for work icon

Image result for training icon

Image result for interview icon

Image result for idea icon
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Graphic element unrelated to the report
Rhode Island’s workforce development system has undergone a tremendous amount of transformation over the past few years; as a result of both the 2014 reauthorization of the federal Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act, and a new direction for our state workforce development investments guided by our State Board. The result is a diverse and comprehensive network of programs that is designed to adeptly serve the needs of the state’s labor supply and demand. 
This report will outline the progress that the state has made in PY2017. We are on the right track. Our industry-driven workforce development programs have received national recognition for their ability to meet employer demand. Our efforts on building career pathways for youths and adults have engaged more education and community partners in these efforts than ever before. Along the way we have helped place thousands of Rhode Islanders into jobs, prepared hundreds of youth for the demands of the labor market, and assisted hundreds of employers to meet their talent needs.  
We look forward to continuing to build on that success in the years to come.  
• Progress made in achieving the state’s strategic vision and goals, as described in the state’s Unified or Combined State Plan, for developing its workforce and meeting employer needs in order to support economic growth and economic self-sufficiency.  


The guiding strategies of the states WIOA Plan issued in 2016 and modified in March 2018 include: 
1. Implementing a demand-driven sector-based strategy to aggregate economic opportunities by employers and their intermediaries 
2. A career pathway strategy to provide employment, education, training and support services for individuals, particularly those with barriers to employment, so they can improve own individual capacity to effectively compete in the labor market to achieve economic security for themselves and their families. 
3. Develop an effective performance measurement strategy to track labor market interactions beyond federal reporting requirements 
Rhode Island has made moderate, and in some cases advanced, progress on each of these strategic goals. From extensive investments in demand-driven programming to the development of a leading-edge statewide youth career readiness effort; the state board is pleased with the progress the workforce system has made in advancing these goals. Specific activities and initiatives will be explored in greater detail in the coming sections.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
• Progress made in implementing sector strategies and career pathways. The discussion may include: business engagement strategies, work-based learning (including apprenticeship), work experiences for youth and adults, transitional jobs, and incumbent worker training strategies and policies in the state.  


Sector Strategies 
Rhode Island’s sector partnership initiative, Real Jobs RI, aggressively meets employer demand to not only increase Rhode Island’s competitiveness in a global economy, but increase the earning potential of incumbent workers trained, open the door to more job opportunities for unemployed Rhode Islanders, and help bring employer knowledge and expertise to the table in a way that can inform and improve the workforce system in the future. Real Jobs RI is the state’s industry-sector workforce training program that ensures that workforce solutions are driven by and developed by actual employer needs. Real Jobs RI connects employers with industry intermediaries such as a trade association, nonprofit, or university, who acts as a facilitator bringing together smaller companies that have similar workforce challenges to create innovative and quick solutions. Solutions include, but are not limited to: recruitment and training of new hires, re-skilling of incumbent workers, and activities focused on the future workforce such as youth career readiness programming. These partnerships also function as sophisticated, real-time, workforce intelligence aggregators that work directly with the state workforce system to disseminate actionable intelligence, detail emerging workforce trends, articulate skill requirements, and design solutions to meet them. 
Career Pathways 
Rhode Island’s middle class job market has experienced a shift away from low-skilled jobs toward more middle and high-skilled occupations. Because today’s workplace needs are more defined, today’s job seeker cannot rely on a generalist approach to his or her future career. Individuals seeking gainful employment, specifically those from traditionally underserved populations, need a high level of career knowledge, skill training, and experience so they can make informed decisions and compete in an increasingly competitive labor market. For this reason, the Governor’s Workforce Board invests in a number of programs designed to provide career pathways for youth and adults.  
Real Pathways RI promotes and supports partnerships between and among nonprofits, education and training providers, community partners, and others, within a specific geographic region or who focus on a similar population (ex. veterans, non-English speakers). These partners collaborate and strategize how to best serve clients through comprehensive and cooperative workforce development programming that is demand-driven, linked to the larger workforce development network, and designed to maximize the opportunities for middle class employment. These programs are predominately state-funded and the state is working on the most effective and efficient way to integrate them into the One Stop Career Center Network. 
PrepareRI is the state’s Three Year Action Plan to Ensure All High School-age Students are College and Career Ready. It provides a statewide strategy to prepare all Rhode Island youth for success in college and career and represents a strategic partnership between government, private industry leaders, K-12 education, higher education, and non-profits across Rhode Island. 
The Non-Trade Apprenticeship Development Program provides ‘start up’ funding to help develop new and innovative apprenticeship training models in high-growth, high-demand fields that extend beyond the traditional trades. Apprenticeship is a tried-and-true training model that is increasingly getting a ‘second look’ in today’s economy. The ‘learn and earn’ structure is mutually beneficial to employer and employee, particularly low-income workers who are able to support themselves and their families as they learn the skills their employer needs. Employers can develop a tiered pay structure that grows as the individual’s value to the company grows. Once a model is successfully developed, the employer is connected with the state Workforce Development Services office to explore placing the apprenticeship model on the state ETPL. 
In addition to the above programs; the state has a number of other initiatives related to career pathways and serving individuals with barriers to employment:  
o The Governor’s Workforce Board, in partnership with the United Way 211 program, issued the first One Stop Career Center ‘Comprehensive Support Service Directory’. The service directory is tool for the workforce development network to locate and connect with support services and service providers throughout Rhode Island. The directory is designed to help staff locate a particular service or support based on a customer’s need.  

o Utilizing standards set by the State Board, both Local Workforce Development Boards developed and implemented certification standards for the One Stop Career Centers in their area. One Stop Certification is a review of the effectiveness, accessibility, and continuous improvement of one-stop centers and the one-stop delivery system.  

o The State Department of Labor and Training, in partnership with the Local Workforce Development Boards, conducted a comprehensive review and audit of the Eligible Training Provide List (those training providers authorized to receive WIOA training funds). Applying strict performance and fiscal integrity standards, the list was reduced from 52 to 35 (as of Feb 2018) to promote higher quality training that is better linked to employment outcomes. 

o Reforms and continued systems improvements remain underway with the statewide American Job Centers, including inter-partner cross-training, facilities redesign, program integration, and other efforts designed to improve the One Stop customer experience. 


 
• If the state has received a small state minimum allotment exception to decrease the minimum out-of-school youth expenditure requirement, describe how the exception has impacted services provided to both in-school youth and out-of-school youth, including specific strategies for serving each population, as well as how the state and/or local area is ensuring serving out-of-school youth remains a priority.   


 
N/A.  
 
 
 
 
• The state’s performance accountability system, including:  

• Any specific state performance measures or goals and progress towards meeting them.  

• Any performance deficiencies on the primary indicators of performance, which may include descriptions of any factors impacting performance.  

• The state’s common exit policy, including which ETA-funded partner programs are included in the state’s common exit policy.  

• Negotiated performance levels for local areas for titles I and III core programs for program years 2016-2017.  

• The state’s approach to data validation and ensuring data integrity, including a description of the methodology of any validation activities that occurred. 


State Specific Measures 
While the state has not yet elected any state-specific measures of performance. One that is under consideration (along with the employer acuity measure discussed later in this report) is the ‘wage and employment delta’ – the difference between where a population was BEFORE they were served by a program and where they were AFTER they exited. Traditionally, the measures for WIOA programming as it relates to wages and employment are a ‘static’ moment in time. Program A reached 85% employment; Program B reached 70% employment. We believe capturing this difference can account for those programs that serve more challenged individuals and allow for more equitable comparison of programs.  
Performance Deficiencies  
Rhode Island is pleased to state that we met or exceed all statewide measures. As for specific local areas; the Greater Rhode Island region did not achieve the 77% Credential Attainment rate for Dislocated Workers (they reached 76.2% and the Providence-Cranston region did not achieve the $6,900.00 Median Earnings target for Dislocated Workers (they reached $6713.00). Consistent with the state vision, both local areas remain commitment to innovation and systems improvement and we believe a more refined statewide definition of recognizable credential, along with guidance and technical assistance, along with more greater integration with our industry sector initiatives will help address both deficiencies.  
Common Exit Policy  
For the purposes of performance calculations in all WIOA core programs, except Vocational Rehabilitation, exit is the point after which an individual who has received services through any program meets specific criteria (§677.150(c)).  This criterion is: 
i. 90 days of no services has elapsed, and 
ii. No future services are planned 
 
For the purposes of this definition, a participant’s use of self-service or the provision of information-only activities or follow-up services will not prevent a participant’s exit. For the Vocational Rehabilitation program, an individual would be determined to have exited the program on the date the individual’s case is closed in accordance with the Vocational Rehabilitation program requirements. Under Vocational Rehabilitation, those individuals who have achieved a supported employment outcome at a subminimum wage are excluded from the definition of “exit”. 
PY2016-2017 Negotiated Performance Levels 
Performance Measures  
  
 PY 2016  
 PY 2017 
 
 
 WIOA Title I Adults  
 
Employment (Second Quarter after Exit)  
  
 72.7% 
 73.0% 
 
Employment (Fourth Quarter after Exit)  
  
 71.2% 
 72.0% 
 
Median Earnings  
  
  $ 5,200.00  
 $5,600.00  
 
Credential Attainment Rate  
  
 66.0% 
 67.0% 
 
Measurable Skill Gains  
  
 Baseline 
 Baseline 
 
Effectiveness in Serving Employers  
  
 Baseline 
 Baseline 
 
 
 WIOA Title I Dislocated Workers  
 
Employment (Second Quarter after Exit)  
  
 76.0% 
 77.0% 
 
Employment (Fourth Quarter after Exit)  
  
 78.0% 
 79.0% 
 
Median Earnings  
  
 $6,800.00  
 $6,900.00  
 
Credential Attainment Rate  
  
 76.6% 
 77.0% 
 
Measurable Skill Gains  
  
 Baseline 
 Baseline 
 
Effectiveness in Serving Employers  
  
 Baseline 
 Baseline 
 
 
 WIOA Title I Youth  
 
Employment (Second Quarter after Exit)  
  
 54.2% 
 55.0% 
 
Employment (Fourth Quarter after Exit)  
  
 58.8% 
 59.0% 
 
Median Earnings  
  
 Baseline 
 Baseline 
 
Credential Attainment Rate  
  
 39.9% 
 50.5% 
 
Measurable Skill Gains  
  
 Baseline 
 Baseline 
 
Effectiveness in Serving Employers  
  
 Baseline 
 Baseline 
 
 
 WIOA Title III Labor Exchange (LEX)*  
 
Employment (Second Quarter after Exit)  
  
 61.0% 
 63.0% 
 
Employment (Fourth Quarter after Exit)  
  
 60.0% 
 61.0% 
 
Median Earnings  
  
 $5,078.00  
 $5,100.00  
 
Effectiveness in Serving Employers (Statewide Measure)  
  
 Baseline 
 Baseline 
 


 
Data Validation 
Data element validation is conducted to ensure that the data elements in participant records that are used to calculate aggregate reports are accurate. Data element validation involves reviews of a sample of participant records against source documentation to ensure compliance with federal definitions. The sample files are selected by the U.S. Department of Labor (USDOL) software from reported exiters and participants.  
 
 
Validators review Adult, Dislocated Worker, Older & Younger Youth files. Some reviews are conducted at the Department of Labor and Training but most are  conducted at vendor sites. Two business days before the scheduled review, the Department of Labor and Training staff sends a list of files selected for review to the appropriate contact person(s). Complete files must be available for review. If certain information is kept separately or in multiple files, effort must be made that all documents are available. 
Once the data element validation is completed, a monitoring report will be issued to each LWDB explaining the overall and specific findings. Written responses within thirty (30) days are required as part of corrective action for any summary findings and recommendations. 
 
Activities provided by state funds:  
• Activities provided with the funds reserved by the governor, which can be up to 15% of the state’s allotment. In this section of the narrative, states may describe activities undertaken in whole or in part with their Governor’s Reserve and how those activities have directly or indirectly impacted performance.  


In addition to required activities – Governor’s Reserve Funds helped fund personnel for the state’s industry sector partnership initiative. Each industry sector partnership is assigned an Advisor who works closely to advise, assist, and observe grant-related activities and performance. Throughout PY2016 and PY2017 the advisors met and worked with each partnership to review deliverables, expectations, and timelines as well as offer technical assistance in implementing program elements and accessing system resources that may help increase capacity. Opportune connections with the One Stop Career Centers, the Community College Network, or other elements of the workforce network and prompted and facilities by these Advisors. 
• Rapid response activities and layoff aversion, which may include:  o Data on number of companies served and number of individuals served.  

o Discussion of strategies for linking Rapid Response recipients to American Job Centers and processes for intake or co-enrollment in the Trade Adjustment Assistance and the Dislocated Worker programs.  

o Discussion of layoff aversion strategies, including any metrics/outcomes developed and/or tracked by the state with respect to layoff aversion, such as return on investment or measures showing the economic benefits of Rapid Response and layoff aversion.  

o Discussion of how Rapid Response and layoff aversion activities are aligned with business engagement, sector strategy, and career pathway efforts, which may include a discussion of any systems, tools, networks or approaches designed to identify companies in distress and strategies to deliver necessary solutions as early as possible, as well as outcomes of the use of such systems or tools.  

o Discussion of specific types of services or workshops provided to both companies and affected workers.  





PY2017 Rapid response and layoff aversion approaches in Rhode Island combine both proactive and reactive activities for contacting employer and/or affected workers to assess layoff needs. Layoff aversion strategies include offering short-term compensation (aka Workshare) or provide alternative 
strategies to employer with the assistance of other business partners entities (Commerce, SBA, Union etc); Rapid Response Set-Aside Grants (if available), state and federally funded incumbent worker training opportunities, industry and community-based workforce development partnerships, and other available services.  
Importantly, Rhode Island seeks to get ahead of any potential mass layoff events by analyzing, and being proactive in acting upon, data and information on dislocations and other economic activity in the State.  Such data is includes incidences of employers applying for Workshare and information provided by the state Labor Market Information unit regarding employers who have had ten or more Unemployment Insurance claims filed against them per week. 
Also as part of a proactive layoff aversion strategy, Rhode Island maintains collaborative partnerships with a range of organizations that can help identify and avert potential layoffs. These partnerships include but are not limited to: Rhode Island Commerce Corporation, the U.S. Department of Commerce Trade Adjustment Assistance for Firms, the Governor’s Workforce Board, and the Department of Labor and Training’s Work Share Program. Information is gathered at downsizing companies regarding reasons for layoff as well as what, if anything, the state can do, or could have done, to avert the layoff. 
Rapid response offers resources to employer and impacted workers including help filing for unemployment insurance, reemployment services, Trade Adjustment programs and supporting filing TAA petition, WIOA training and Real Jobs Rhode Island training, Affordable Care Act information (HealthSource RI), Hardest Hit Fund Rhode Island (Hardest Hit Fund is US Treasury gave funding to RI Housing to help prevent foreclosures.), United Way, and Retirement and Health Care Coverage by US DOL Employee Benefits Security Administration.  
When appropriate, additional services may be provided to employees, which may include: 
 
• Group or Individual Registration 
• Job Search Workshops 
• Individual Assessment/Counseling 
• Job Search Strategies and Techniques 
• Resume Writing 
• Interviewing 
• TAA Orientations 
• Job fairs/Company matching 
• Other services as necessary 
 
Rhode Island strives to provide Rapid Response services as early as possible.  
 
 
 
• Activities provided under the Wagner-Peyser Act Employment Service section 7(b) (e.g., services to groups with special needs or extra costs of exemplary models for delivering services).  


Rhode Island is proud of its continued efforts with the Ticket to Work program (TTW). TTW is an employment support program for people with disabilities who are interested in going to work or increasing their current employment. The program offers Social Security Administration (SSA) disability beneficiaries greater choice in obtaining the services they need to help them go to work.  
The program’s goal is to increase opportunities and choices for Social Security disability beneficiaries to get vocational rehabilitation, employment, and other support services from public and private providers, employers, and other organizations. Participation in the TTW program begins when a person reaches an agreement with an Employment Network (EN) or state vocational rehabilitation (VR) agency. 
Part of this effort includes a strategic partnership with the Arrigan Center - a non-profit outpatient rehabilitation facility under the purview of the Rhode Island Department of Labor and Training, whose goal is to restore every Rhode Island injured worker to health, social independence, and optimal working capacity. The partnership provides injured workers with the necessary tools and resources to re-enter the workforce by building upon their transferable skills and capabilities ; supports job driven approaches to equip all customers with the skills, competencies, and/or credentials necessary to help them obtain in-demand jobs, increase earnings, and advance their careers by bringing together individuals seeking employment with employers seeking workers; and provides universal access to an integrated array of labor exchange services  
Employment services for Arrigan customers focus on implementing a customized/tailored action plan for people with special needs by providing an array of employment related labor exchange services including 1-1 staff assisted delivery approaches in; job seeker assessment of skill levels, abilities and aptitudes, career guidance, job search assistance, job referrals, recruitment services to employers and referral to training (if applicable). 
 
• Any National Dislocated Worker Grants (DWGs) awarded to or within the state and how those funds are coordinated with state rapid response activities and dislocated worker programs, as well as how the DWGs fit in with state co-enrollment policies and disaster/emergency management activities, as applicable.  


 
N/A 
 
• Any technical assistance needs of the state workforce system. 2 See WIOA section 128(a)(1).  


N/A. 
 
 
 
 
• Promising practices, lessons learned, and success stories that focus on serving employers, communities, and individuals with barriers to employment, including information based on the state's evaluation and related research projects. This discussion should cover a broad range of at-risk and priority populations served, including out-of-school youth, low-income adults, dislocated workers, individuals who are basic skills deficient, individuals with limited language proficiency, individuals with disabilities, veterans, the long-term unemployed, and any other individuals with barriers to employment, or other populations the state may wish to discuss. 


 
The workforce system effort focused on the defense industry section continues to perform exemplary – meeting complex employer demand for high-skilled talent while building pathways to opportunity for hundreds of Rhode Islanders. This is due, in part, to the inclusion of the employer in the intake and recruitment process before clients are placed in training and career services. This is not an exclusionary practice but rather is utilized due to the unique standards of employment in the defense sector. The state previously has had a hard time delivering for defense industry employers and, by extension, the job seekers we were serving, due to a failure to properly screen for the additional criteria such as drug screening and background checks. Our enhanced employer involvement at the front end dramatically enhances the likelihood of success. 
The state’s broader investments in industry partnerships has also been essential to the success of the workforce development network. Since 2005, the state of Rhode Island has funded the Industry Partnership Program, which asks industry intermediaries to convene employers in their industries and serve as their industry’s voice to ensure informed strategic investment in workforce development. Those investments were the springboard for our “2.0” employer-led sector-driven workforce development grant program, Real Jobs RI. Real Jobs RI no longer asks industries to simply identify their workforce challenges, but now full engages them in developing the solutions to those challenges by strategically deploying state and federal resources. With over 30 partnerships (as of the development of this report) across 16 industry sectors, Real Jobs Rhode Island is the backbone of the state’s demand-driven workforce strategy and acknowledges that the extent to which we better meet employer need is the extent to which we better serve our job seeker clients. 
  
• Any challenges the state workforce system faces, which may include policy, implementation, or other relevant challenge.  


 
N/A. 
 
• Any strategies/polices relating to Pay-for-Performance contracting, which may include examples from local areas 


N/A. 
 
 
• Identify each waiver that the state has had in place for at least one program year and provide information regarding the state’s progress toward achieving the goals and performance outcomes in ETA’s letter of approval for the waiver (sec 189(i)(3)(C)(ii)) and outlined in the state’s waiver request (when applicable). Discuss how activities carried out under each approved waiver have directly or indirectly affected state and local area performance outcomes. To the extent possible, provide quantitative information.  


While Rhode Island does not have any waivers currently since the enactment of WIOA (a standing waiver the state was granted under WIA related to the size of the state board was no longer necessary due to the flexibility granted under WIOA), it recently submitted a number of waivers intended to help improve job seeker and employer outcomes while simplifying the administrative process for One Stop Career Center staff and advancing the overall goal of a high-functioning customer-focused WIOA system in Rhode Island. 
WAIVER(S) SUMMARY 
WAIVER REQUESTED – Individual Record Reporting for Wagner-Peyser Customer Requirements 
CITATION:  20 CFR 677.235(a) 
ISSUE(S):  Employment Services (often referred to by the WIOA title that funds them: ‘Wagner-Peyser’) provide universal access to job seekers and generally offer low-cost relatively brief services to help enter or return to the workforce. Requesting information including, but limited to: disability status; homelessness; income level; skills deficiencies; and single parenthood; represents a burden for participants and staff. In some cases; it may take more time to obtain this information that it does to actually provide the service being requested. Furthermore, Wagner-Peyser funding does not support the additional workload for staff that is necessary collect and verify all the data to be reported 
PROPOSAL:   A waiver from the requirement that One Stop Staff must collect and report individual level data for Wagner-Peyser customers to the same level as other programs.  
----------- 
WAIVER REQUESTED – Eligible Training Provider List Participant Outcome Requirements 
CITATION:  WIOA Sections 116 and 122 | 20 CFR 677.230 and 20 CFR 680.400 thru 680.530 
ISSUE(S):  WIOA requires that eligible training providers must collect and report performance related data on all students participating in training program if that program is listed on the state's Eligible Training Provider List; whether or not they are receiving WIOA training funds. This presents a number of problems: 
• Proprietary schools, particularly those with the resources, equipment, and technology necessary to train for high wage, high demand occupations-  lack a formal system to report student data and lack the ability to automatically match student data with other data sources to calculate outcomes – resulting in a large reporting burden on these types of training providers.  

• In the absence of an automated data system - much of the required performance information would have to be self-reported through surveys, phone interviews, etc., which is very labor intensive and reduces the accuracy of the information.  


• Proprietary schools would have to collect sensitive information, such as social security numbers, etc., on all students in order for the state to match wages and earnings information, which may leave the students open to identity theft, privacy considerations, etc.  

• The requirement that providers collect data on all students must result in the exit of several high functioning training providers from the ETPL, including those with resources and technology necessary to train for high wage, high demand occupations. 

• This loss of training providers limits consumer choice and the opportunity for WIOA participants to access high quality training for several high wage, high demand occupations. 

• This loss of training providers reduces the ‘market’ of eligible training providers to compete for ITA resources  

• This loss of training providers limits the ability of local workforce development boards to respond to the diverse talent needs of employers in their area. 


PROPOSAL:   A waiver from the requirement that ETPL providers must provide wage and employment outcome information for all students participating in a training program; and instead limit said requirement to only those students who are participating through WIOA. 
----------- 
WAIVER REQUESTED – Definition of an Eligible Training Provider 
CITATION:  20 CFR 680.410 
ISSUE(S):  Real Jobs RI and Real Pathways RI partnerships offer innovative comprehensive solutions to employer workforce challenges. The ‘partnership’ design of these entities is essential to their success. Such a model acknowledges that no one entity ‘has all the answers’ and enables training, community, and employer partners to each ‘play to their strengths’ in delivering comprehensive solutions that directly reflect real-time employer demand. The partnership becomes an entity unto itself that is a composite of all partner entities, but is not exclusive to any single one. 
However, with an emphasis on financial accountability and insurance reasons (among others) regulations for placement on the Eligible Training Provider list limit the definition to a single entity, such as a proprietary training provider or a Community College. The flexible and modular nature of training partnerships is incompatible with this definition.  
PROPOSAL:   A waiver or revision to the definition of an Eligible Training Provider to allow for pre-vetted consortium models when appropriate. This would be done on a closely monitored pilot basis in Rhode Island, with the potential to be replicated elsewhere.  
----------- 
 
 
 
 
 
WAIVER REQUESTED – Definition of Eligible WIOA Youth     
CITATION:  20 CFR 681 
ISSUE(S):  Two-generation approaches to solving poverty (also known as “whole family approaches”) focus on creating opportunities for, and addressing the needs of, both youth and adult(s) in their lives together. These methods have been proven effective and are strongly supported and promoted by the United State Department of Health and Human Services – Administration for Children and Families. ( 
 Effective WIOA Youth services can dramatically improve a young person’s career development, academic performance, and future economic stability. Presently these services are available to youth that many one of several eligibility criteria, focusing on both in-school and (predominately) out-of-school youth. 
PROPOSAL:   A waiver that would allow a youth to automatically be determined eligible for Title I Youth services if their parent/guardian receives Title I Adult services and is from a priority population pursuant to Section 134(c)(3)(E) 
----------- 
WAIVER REQUESTED – Definition of Allowable Youth Work Experience Expenditures    
CITATION:  WIOA Sec. 129 (c)(4) | Training and Employment Guidance Letter  21-16 
ISSUE(S):  WIOA Section 129(c)(4) requires that not less than 20% of the funds allocated to the local area under the Title I Youth program shall be used to provide youth with paid and unpaid work experiences that have as a component academic and occupational education. Other regulations declare that Supportive services (such as transportation, child care, dependent care, housing, and other services that are necessary to enable an individual to participate in a work experience) are a separate program element and cannot be counted toward the work experience expenditure requirement even if supportive services assist the youth in participating in the work experience. 
Rhode Island believes that support services that directly relate to the youth’s ability to participate in the work experience such as uniforms, tools, and employment-related travel are essential to the work experience just as they are to actual employment and should be counted toward the 20% Youth Work Experience expenditure requirement. 
PROPOSAL:   A waiver or revision to the definition of Allowable Work Experience Expenditures to include support services that directly relate to the work experience.  
----------- 
 
 
 
 
 
WAIVER REQUESTED – Definition of Youth Work Experience  
CITATION:  WIOA Section 129(C)(2(c)  | 20 CFR 681.600 
ISSUE(S):  “Paid and unpaid work experience” is one of the 14 program elements that are required within the WIOA youth program.  Work experience is defined as a planned, structured learning experience that takes place in a workplace and provides youth with opportunities for career exploration and skill development.  Registered apprenticeships are currently not included in the list of eligible work experiences in the WIOA youth program. Apprenticeship is a tried and true training model that is increasingly receiving a second look in today's economy. Particularly for in-school and out-of-school youth, apprenticeships are a vehicle to self-sufficiency and good jobs, allowing participants to earn while they learn during the apprenticeship period. 
PROPOSAL:   A waiver or revision to the definition of Youth Work Experience to include Apprenticeships 
• Identify the two approaches the state has chosen for the Effectiveness in Serving Employers performance indicator pilot. If the state is piloting a state-established measure of Effectiveness in Serving Employers, or has any other metrics to assess employer engagement, describe the measure or metric as well.  


WIOA sec. 116(b)(2)(A)(i)(VI) requires the US Departments of Labor and Education to establish a primary indicator of performance for effectiveness in serving employers. In December 2016, the Departments announced they will be piloting three approaches designed to gauge three critical workforce needs of the business community. 
Approach 1 – Retention with the same employer  
Approach 2 – Repeat Business Customers  
Approach 3 – Employer Penetration Rate  
Since this indicator is a new approach for measuring performance under WIOA’s six core programs, the Departments have implemented a pilot program during which States must select two of the three approaches. The Departments will evaluate state experiences with the various approaches and plan to identify a standardized indicator that the Departments anticipate will be implemented no later than the beginning of Program Year 2019. 
The Governor’s Workforce Board elects to adopt Approach 1 (Retention with the same employer) and Approach 3 (Employer Penetration Rate) at this time. The Board may revisit these measures in future and may adopt additional measures. These two approaches are measured as follows:  
Approach 1 – Retention with the same employer: The number of participants with wage records who exit during the reporting period and were employed by the same employer during the second quarter after exit and the fourth quarter after exit DIVIDED by the number of participants with wage records who exit and were employed during the second quarter after exit.  
Approach 3 – Employer Penetration Rate: The total number of establishments, as defined by the BLS QCEW program, that received a service or, if it is an ongoing activity, are continuing to receive a service or other assistance during the reporting period DIVIDED by the total number of establishments, as defined by BLS QCEW, located within the State during the final month or quarter of the reporting period. 
Although not yet formalized in policy or practice, the state of Rhode Island is also considering a measure relegated to Job Placement acuity to determine effectiveness in serving employers. This measure is still in an abstract developmental stage, but the hope is that such a measure could determine the public workforce system’s ability to help employers find skilled talent for more difficult-to-fill positions. The measure would not seek to be exclusionary or promote one occupation over another- but would include factors like the length of time a position was vacant within a control group, versus the time to fill when working with the public workforce system. There are many variables still in play and while the state may not ultimately adopt the measure, we feel such a measure is a marketable value proposition that can help measure system effectiveness while demonstrating to employers the impact the workforce system can have on their bottom line. 
• Include brief descriptions of: (a) current or planned evaluation and related research projects, including methodologies used; (b) efforts to coordinate the development of such projects with WIOA core programs, other state agencies and local boards; (c) a list of completed evaluation and related reports and links to where they were made accessible to the public electronically; (d) State efforts to provide data, survey responses, and timely site visits for Federal evaluations; and (e) any continuous improvement strategies utilizing results from studies and evidence-based practices evaluated. 


By state statute, the State Workforce Development Board must publish what we call the “UEP” - the Unified Expenditure and Program report – a compendium of all workforce development (tightly defined and including state and federal programs) spending and performance throughout the state. This started as a paper document however – over time the document evolved, to become much more robust, consistent, and accurate. Two years ago we migrated from a pdf to web-based Tableau data story comprised of several dashboards that visualize workforce investments by target populations and primary program goal to help users understand where these funds are targeted. This year, we are including two fiscal years of data, which will provide a more-real-time snapshot of workforce investments, outcomes, and participant demographics.   
The UEP was the springboard for a lot of our Workforce Data Quality Initiative (WDQI) work, in which the end-game is the more comprehensive P20W (pre-K through Grade 20 through Workforce) system that will visualize the linkages between education and workforce data, promote further system integration for better policy analysis and public transparency, and track real-time metrics that reflect progress in the state’s priority areas. The dashboards will also allow users to explore the data and analyze the trajectory of Rhode Islanders as they move along the education to workforce continuum. 
Along with the focus on collecting, analyzing, and publishing data, the state of Rhode Island has undertaken (or is soon to undertake) a number of performance management and evaluation projects. “DLTStat” is a performance management tool that allows the Rhode Island Department of Labor and Training to strategically coordinate and plan for the continued and growing success of programs within the agency, including WIOA-funded activities.. DLTStat serves to increase communication between the program staff and executive layer of the department on the performance and day-to-day execution of key programs. The genesis of DLTStat was CompStat, a NYPD program implemented in the early 1990s to reduce crime in New York City. The idea that animated CompStat is that data ought to drive performance management. The CompStat model was later adapted by the city of Baltimore (CityStat) and by the state of Maryland (StateStat). 
DLTStat sessions are lengthy and intense ‘deep dives’ into performance to determine what is working, what is not, and, if applicable, what needs to change. A focus on WIOA and related activities is planned for the upcoming yea; including a deep dive in performance as well as process measures that relate to customer service. The purpose of these meeting is to hold program managers accountable while also collaboratively solving problems. This formal performance management program is an effective vehicle to identify and overcome performance challenges as they arise. The state will soon be partnering with Johns Hopkins University on dramatically improving the DLTStat process, with a plan to identify which measures are the most impactful and action-orientated within the workforce system and what questions are the most important to ask.  
Parallel to that work, the state also intends to partner with the SAS Institute (https://www.sas.com/en_us/home.html) on developing a leading-edge ROI calculation for the workforce system that will effectively tell our ‘story’ to the public, to policymakers, and other stakeholders.  
• Describe the state’s approach to customer satisfaction, which may include such information used for one-stop center certification, in accordance with 20 CFR 678.800. This description should include: 1) the state’s methodologies; 2) the number of individuals/employers who were provided customer satisfaction outreach, the response rate, and efforts made to improve the response rate; 3) the results and whether the results are generalizable to the entire population of customers; and 4) a description of any continuous improvement processes for incorporating the customer satisfaction feedback. 


 
Each program under the WIOA network utilizes its own approach to querying and documenting customer satisfaction.  
For job seeker services; customer satisfaction surveys are provided and collected at American Job Centers across the state. In program Year 2017 – 1516 surveys were conducted. The state was pleased to see that the results of these surveys were generally quite positive. When asked to rate the services they received by One Stop center staff; results were as follows: 
 
 
 No Response 
 Needs Improvement 
 Just Okay 
 Helpful 
 Very Helpful 
 Total 
 
 Professionalism/helpfulness of staff 
 15 
 9 
 13 
 205 
 1274 
 1516 
 
Job search resources 
 32 
 7 
 41 
 303 
 1133 
 1516 
 
Appearance of center 
 42 
 10 
 79 
 296 
 1089 
 1516 
 
Your overall experience 
 17 
 14 
 37 
 254 
 1194 
 1516 
 


 
For employer services; the Business Workforce Center surveyed 494 employers whom had an onsite visit by the Business Workforce Center.  71 surveys where returned. General feedback indicated that site visits where informative and helped the employers learn about hiring incentives and recruiting opportunities. However, many felt that services should be advertised better.  Other feedback indicated that, although knowledgeable of the programs and services available – many employers had not yet started using the services.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Graphic element unrelated to the report
Graphic element unrelated to the report
Graphic element unrelated to the report

