An image with the report title of 21017 Washington State Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act Title I and Title III with an image of a group of diverse people along with 3 other images of people obtaining services such as veteran services, education and training via workshops and apprenticeship programs.
Contents 
 
Section I – Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act in Washington state 
Introduction 3 
What is the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act? 3 
Overview of Washington’s workforce development system 3 
State and local roles 4 
WIOA Title I and Title III program descriptions 4 
 
Section II – WIOA and What is Working Well 
Washington’s labor market  7 
Talent and Prosperity for All, the strategic plan for unlocking Washington’s  9 
 Potential (2016-2020)  
WIOA strategic planning and implementation committees, structure and process 9 
Implementation 10 
TAP accelerator funding 11 
Review and re-approval in 2018 11 
CareerBridge.wa.gov and the Eligible Training Provider list 12 
State policy development 13 
Governor’s statewide activities funds 14 
Sector Partnership National Emergency Grant July 1 2017 to June 30 2018 16 
Veteran Services 16 
Title III: Wagner-Peyser Act Program (Employment Services) 17 
 
Section III – WIOA Title I and Title III results 
Background 19 
Customer satisfaction 19 
Additional assessments 20 
Evaluation activities, including net impact and cost benefit 20 
Data validation 21 
Results and analysis 21 
Cost effectiveness 21 
Results for WIOA adults 21 
Results for WIOA dislocated workers 22 
Results for WIOA youth 23 
Net impact analysis 23 
 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Highlights of Washington’s Workforce Development Councils:  24 
 Summary overview of all WDCs, highlights for each individual WDC  
Appendix 2: Statewide Performance Reports 62 
Section I – Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act  in Washington State 
Introduction 
Last year, 102,827 Washington residents received help getting a job at one of the 49 WorkSource offices and affiliate sites located throughout the state. They came with a range of backgrounds and experiences: low-income youth and adults struggling to support themselves, workers displaced by a changing economy and veterans returning home from war. Most needed help connecting to unemployment insurance benefits and assistance in determining next career steps. Others needed more basic, individualized or training services to overcome barriers to meaningful employment. Two of the primary funding sources for these basic, individualized services is the federal Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act  (WIOA) Title I and Wagner-Peyser Title III programs, which has funded activities in Washington since July 1, 2015. Training services are funded through WIOA Title I programs. This report provides an in-depth look at the impact those funds have had in Washington in Program Year 2017 (PY2017), July 1, 2017 to June 30, 2018. 
What is the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act? 
The Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act of 2014 establishes the structure and relationship between national, state and local workforce investment activities. “The purpose of Title I and Title III is to assist individuals in accessing employment, education and training to succeed in the labor market, and to match employers with skilled workers they need to compete in the global economy. The goal is for program participants to increase employment, median earnings and credential obtainment (Title I only).” 
In PY2017, the U.S. Department of Labor (USDOL) allocated $64,949,328 in WIOA Title I formula funds to Washington for employment and training services designed to benefit employers, dislocated workers, disadvantaged adults and low-income youth. USDOL allocated $14,769,360 in Wagner-Peyser funds to provide specialized attention and services to individuals with disabilities, migrant and seasonal farmworkers, ex-offenders, youth, minorities and older workers. 
Overview of Washington’s Workforce Development System 
Washington’s workforce development system is a coordinated and collaborative network of services, programs and investments with a shared goal of improving the skills of the state’s workforce. In order to meet the challenge of the 21st century global economy, the public workforce system works in partnership with businesses, educators, organized labor and community leaders to foster economic development and high-growth opportunities in regional economies.  This network further helps potential job candidates, particularly low-income youth, adults and displaced workers, overcome obstacles to successful employment. These services are coordinated through WorkSource, the state’s one-stop delivery system. Primary funding for WorkSource operations and many of the WorkSource basic and individualized services is provided by the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act Title I and the Wagner-Peyser Act of 1933. 
At the heart of the public workforce system is WorkSource, made up of one-stop career center, affiliate and connection sites. WorkSource is the primary access point to qualified workers, as well as to a multitude of resources for businesses and job seekers. WorkSource serves thousands of individuals who are seeking employment, changing jobs, reentering the workforce or learning new skills. This makes WorkSource an ideal venue for workforce solutions for job seekers and businesses alike. 
  
At WorkSource centers, affiliate and connection sites throughout the state, individuals can open a claim for unemployment insurance, find job openings, receive other job search assistance and attend workshops that can improve employability. Qualified individuals can find assistance with specific training in high demand occupations. Businesses can get help with workforce needs including recruitment, screening, employee training, layoff aversion and employee retention. 
Primary funding for the WorkSource service delivery system are supported by WIOA Title I and the Wagner-Peyser Act. Other formula-based and competitive federal, state and local resources and services that support WorkSource include Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), veteran services, USDOL National Dislocated Worker Grant (NDWG), Job Corps, Trade Adjustment Assistance, vocational rehabilitation services, migrant and seasonal farmworker assistance and philanthropic funds. 
State and Local Roles 
The Workforce Training and Education Coordinating Board (Workforce Board) serves as the state’s Workforce Investment Board and manages performance accountability for WIOA. The core business of the Workforce Board is to coordinate state policy and state strategic planning for the workforce development system, evaluate results and facilitate demonstration projects that test innovations and ideas. 
The Employment Security Department (ESD) serves as the state’s WIOA Title I grant recipient. These WIOA responsibilities include stewardship of the funds, oversight and monitoring activities, issuing statewide policy, management of grants and contracts and allocation of the WIOA Title I funds to the local area Workforce Development Councils (WDCs) for the delivery of services within an integrated service delivery system. 
ESD also fulfills an operational role within the WorkSource system through providing services funded under the Wagner-Peyser, Trade Adjustment Assistance and Jobs for Vets Acts. 
WDCs are the local conveners and managers of the WorkSource system through which WIOA programs are accessed. They are the strategic visionaries for local implementation of WIOA funds. There are 12 WDCs in Washington, and each is private industry led and locally focused. Council members are appointed by Chief Elected Officials (CEOs), and councils are certified by the Governor. CEOs are the local area WIOA Title I grant recipients. CEOs direct their WDC’s staff to administer the funds and oversee the area’s WorkSource centers to most effectively respond to the local economy and needs of local citizens. WDCs convene with regional partners and stakeholders to assess skill gaps, identify emerging and future employment possibilities and collaborate with economic developers and other partners to develop the region’s workforce development plan. WDCs are the system’s portal into the business community and are responsible for facilitating multiple interagency projects and programs. 
WIOA Title I and Title III Program Descriptions 
WIOA Title I Youth Program 
Who is served: Youth must be between 14 and 24 years old, low income (WIOA allows for a 5% exclusion) and meet other criteria described in the WIOA, such as a need for additional assistance to complete an educational program or to secure and hold employment. To qualify as low income, one must be a welfare or food stamp recipient, homeless, a foster child or have a family income below 70% of the lower living standard income level — $12,060 per individual or $32,206 for a family of four. 
Participation: 3,822 young people were served by the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act Youth Program between July 1, 2017 and June 30, 2018. 
  
Program description: The program prepares low-income youth ages 14 through 24 for success in school and the world of work. Eligible youth may receive counseling, tutoring, job training, mentoring or work experience. Other service options include summer employment, study skills training and instruction in obtaining a GED or equivalent. 
WIOA Title I Adult Program 
Who is served: Specific eligibility guidelines are described in the WIOA. Basic services are available to all adults with minimal eligibility requirements. Basic, individualized or training services are authorized for unemployed individuals unable to find jobs. In some cases, these services are available to employed workers who need more help to reach self-sufficiency. 
Participation: 23,192 participants received career services and 1,883 participants received training services by the WIOA Adult Training Services Program between July 1, 2017 and  June 30, 2018. 
Program description: The program prepares individuals 18 years and older for participation in the labor force by providing basic services and access to job training and other services. Services are coordinated through the state’s one-stop career center system, WorkSource. Basic services include skill assessment, labor market information, consumer reports on training programs and job search and placement assistance. Individualized and training include more intensive assessments, work experiences and occupational skills training. Priority is given to veterans and eligible spouses, low-income individuals and recipients of public assistance. 
WIOA Title I Dislocated Worker Program 
Who is served: Specific eligibility guidelines are described in the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA). Dislocated workers are people who lost jobs due to plant closures, company downsizing or some other significant change in market conditions. In most cases, eligible workers are unlikely to return to their occupations because those jobs are no longer economically viable, and they must be eligible for (or have exhausted) unemployment compensation. Other conditions can lead to eligibility for services, such as separating military service members and eligible spouses of military service members, being self-employed but not working as a result of general economic conditions or being a displaced homemaker. 
Participation: 2,685 participants received career services and 2,360 received training services through the WIOA Dislocated Worker Career Program between July 1, 2017 and June 30, 2018. 
Program description: The program tailors employment and training services to meet dislocated workers’ needs, establishes early intervention for workers and firms facing substantial layoffs and fosters labor, management and community partnerships with government to address worker dislocation. Dislocated workers are also eligible for basic services including skill assessment, labor market information, training program consumer reports and job search and placement assistance. Individualized and training include more intensive assessments, work experiences and occupational skills training. 
WIOA Title III Wagner-Peyser Program 
Who is served: Specific eligibility guidelines are described in the WIOA. Career services are available to anyone who is legally entitled to work in the United States no matter one’s age or employment status. Through Title III, basic and individualized career services are offered. A veteran or his or her eligible spouse has a priority to receive such services. 
Participation: 102,827 participants were served under Wagner-Peyser with 96,663 having received career services between July 1, 2017 and June 30, 2018. Furthermore, 6,164 Wagner-Peyser participants received training services funded by other programs. 
 
Program description: The Wagner-Peyser Act of 1933 established a nationwide system of public employment offices, known as the Employment Service. The Employment Service seeks to improve the functioning of the nation's labor markets by bringing together individuals seeking employment with employers seeking workers. The Wagner-Peyser Act was amended in 1998 to make the Employment Service part of the one-stop delivery system under the Workforce Investment Act. In 2014, the Wagner-Peyser Act was amended again under Title III of the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act. The Employment Service under the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act builds upon the previous workforce reforms, requires colocation of the Employment Service offices into the nearly 2,500 American Job Centers nationwide, and aligns performance accountability indicators with other federal workforce programs. Basic services include skill assessment, labor market information, consumer reports on training programs and job search and placement assistance. Individualized services include career and vocational counseling. 
  
Section II – WIOA and What is Working Well 
Washington’s Labor Market 
Strong Economy Pushes Labor Market into Maximum Employment Neighborhood 
The current economic expansion began in June 2009 and has lasted to become the second longest expansion on record. If the economy is still in expansion by next summer (2019), it will set the mark for the longest expansion on record. Current existing economic conditions are increasing the likelihood of this event occurring. Growth is running at a very healthy pace, having risen to an above average-trend level during the second half of 2018. Inflation is low and stable and wages are up.  
The labor market is particularly robust. Job growth has picked up at both the national and state levels. The Washington state economy has been growing at a faster pace than the national average over the past five years, and that has resulted in greater job growth for the state on a percentage basis. Payroll employment at both the national and state levels has posted solid gains. The average number of jobs added per month nationwide this year through September is 208,000 compared with 170,000 per month during the same period one year earlier. Washington has been adding about 9,300 jobs per month in 2018 compared with 5,700 jobs per month in 2017. 
Figure 1. Percentage change in employment, total nonfarm, seasonally adjusted 
United States and Washington, January 2011 through September 2018, year over year 
Source: Employment Security Department/LMEA; U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics 
 

Figure 1. Percentage change in employment, total nonfarm, seasonally adjusted, United States and Washington, January 2011 through September 2018, year over year. Source: Employment Security Department/LMEA; U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.
 
The headline unemployment rate is arguably the best single indicator of labor market conditions. It is widely known and updated each month. The national unemployment rate fell to 3.7 percent in September, the lowest level since December 1969. Washington state saw its unemployment rate fall to 4.4 percent in September, setting a new record low based on the historical data series maintained by the Bureau of Labor Statistics for states. 
  
Figure 2. Historical unemployment rates, seasonally adjusted 
United States, Washington and Seattle Metropolitan Division, January 2011 through September 2017 
Source: Employment Security Department/LMEA; U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics 
 

Figure 2. Historical unemployment rates, seasonally adjusted, United States, Washington and Seattle Metropolitan Division, January 2011 through September 2017. Source: Employment Security Department/LMEA; U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Taking all these measures into account strongly suggests labor is being highly utilized. Assessments of the maximum level of utilization, or full employment, are uncertain and subject to revision. 
Talent and Prosperity for All, the Strategic Plan for Unlocking Washington’s Workforce Potential (2016–2020)  
Enacted in 2014, the federal Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA) required Washington state to develop a strategic plan for workforce development as a condition of receiving federal funds. As WIOA’s vision and mission were defined during initial introduction to the new Act, the Board recognized the close alignment between the state’s pre-existing strategic workforce development plan, “High Skills, High Wages,” and the requirements under this new Act. To streamline the state and federal planning processes, the Board acted in 2015 to combine the plans and rebrand them under a new name: Talent and Prosperity for All, or “TAP.” 
On October 27, 2014, Governor Jay Inslee designated the Workforce Training and Education Coordinating Board (“Workforce Board,” or “Board”) as Washington’s strategic board responsible for coordinating implementation of the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act of 2014 (WIOA) in Washington. While developing the first state strategic plan for workforce development under WIOA, he challenged the Board and its partners to develop policy recommendations and goals that: 
1. Help more people find and keep jobs that lead to economic self-sufficiency, with a focus on disadvantaged populations; 

2. Close skill gaps for employers, with a focus on in-demand industry sectors and occupations; and 

3. To work together as a single, seamless team to make this happen. 


The Board responded by convening a network of workforce development stakeholders in communities across Washington, under the guidance of business and labor leaders representing the perspective of the system’s customers. Over a thousand citizens from every corner of Washington participated in committees, task forces and public forums that informed the creation of the goals and strategies within TAP. 
TAP emphasizes opportunities to streamline services for job seekers in an integrated and coordinated way, reducing waste and helping people quickly connect to the education and training they need to find their footing on a career pathway. The plan set goals designed to strengthen sector-based partnerships with employers to identify and address skill gaps, and affirms a commitment to eliminating accessibility barriers for all, including communities of color, immigrant and refugee communities, the disabled, older job seekers, veterans and other vulnerable populations. The team effort that went into the creation of TAP reflected a new level of communication, collaboration and cooperation among state agencies. 
WIOA Strategic Planning and Implementation Committees, Structure and Process 
Shortly after Governor Inslee charged the Board with coordinating WIOA implementation statewide in October 2014, the Board established a Steering Committee co-chaired by Gary Chandler and Jeff Johnson that coordinated the process of developing the state’s strategic plan for workforce development, Talent and Prosperity for All. 
  
The Steering Committee was seated near the end of 2014. The Steering Committee chartered three sub-committees (Sector Strategies and Business Engagement, Performance Accountability, and Education Pathways Through Integrated Service Delivery) co-chaired by leaders from the business community and organized labor. Each committee brought together policymakers, subject-matter experts, and service providers to develop recommendations that would transform our workforce system, resulting in TAP’s four strategic priorities: 
. Strengthening business engagement; 

. Ensuring accessibility for all; 

. Streamlining the customer experience; and 

. Building a next-generation performance accountability system. 


Subcommittees began meeting on an almost monthly basis throughout 2015 to develop recommendations to the Board that would be integrated into the eventual state strategic plan. Beginning in October 2015, representatives from each of the core and partner programs committed to joining the TAP plan engaged in drafting the required operational elements required of each specific program. In March 2016, the Board submitted the plan to the relevant federal agencies. TAP was approved by the federal agencies during summer 2016. Since approval, the Board has coordinated a network of five implementation committees charged with accomplishing goals assigned from the plan. 
In September, the state took the strategic priorities out to eight public forums, seeking input from more than 400 participants. A writing team of core and strategic partners met weekly to develop the full strategic and operational plan. The plan was released for a 30-day public comment period in January 2016. It was taken to the Board for final approval in February 2016, approved by Governor Inslee, and submitted on the portal in March 2016. The plan was subsequently approved in summer 2016, and updated and reapproved (as described below) in 2018. 
Implementation 
Upon submission of the plan, the Workforce Board approved an implementation process, following the successful committee structure used within planning. The strategic decision-making, performance, accountability and oversight of progress towards the goals within TAP remains with the Board. As of fall 2018, five Implementation Committees are actively working under the Board’s coordination to implement elements of the TAP plan’s goals, or to produce policy recommendations for the Board’s consideration: 
1. Barrier and access solutions 

2. Professional development 

3. Integrating service delivery 

4. Common intake process 

5. Performance accountability and data sharing 


After initially creating a sixth committee to focus on Business Engagement, the Board acted in September 2017 to dissolve the Business Engagement Committee’s independent membership and assume its responsibilities at the Board level. As such, exploring innovative business engagement approaches became a key Board focus throughout 2017 and 2018. 
  
Each committee’s work is guided by a process charter with defined goals, milestones and measurable outcomes. Implementation reports are a standing agenda item for all Board meetings (implementation updates may be found hyperlinked in each Board meeting agenda, available at: http://wtb.wa.gov/ABOUTUS_MEETINGS.asp) The Board provides ongoing support and will address policy recommendations and issues as they arise.  
TAP Accelerator Funding 
Governor Inslee fully supports the ongoing TAP implementation work and has identified TAP Acceleration as a key priority in his plan for the WIOA discretionary funds. The Governor set aside PY16 WIOA statewide activity funds as “TAP Accelerator Funds” for three uses:  
. $1.8 million for the development of nine competitively granted local demonstration projects funded by the Governor’s Upskill-Backfill Initiative (UBI), in which Board staff provides technical assistance to grantees while the Employment Security Department provides contract management and performance oversight;  

. $300,000 in $25,000 planning grants to the 12 local workforce development councils (WDCs) convening partnerships around UBI proposals and to accelerate implementation of their local plans, which was awarded in first quarter 2017; and  

. $360,000 for the five TAP Implementation Committees above to accelerate progress towards TAP goals by providing additional resources for staff support or to create pilot projects. 


Notably, TAP Accelerator funds have been used to develop and pilot the first workforce development training module available to all system partners. The Learning Management System developed by Department of Enterprise Services and the Professional Development Committee launched its first module in October 2018, a comprehensive overview of the workforce system and the TAP plan. It was road-tested with over 100 staff members at the Pacific Mountain WDC, as well as with system stakeholders at the state level. 
Review and Re-approval of TAP in 2018 
WIOA sets a four-year life cycle for state plans, with an exception that the first WIOA state plan be reviewed and reapproved by the state at the two-year mark. TAP was up for its first review and re-approval during fall 2017 and spring 2018, before a federally mandated resubmission date of March 15, 2018. TAP’s two-year anniversary is an occasion to examine progress on the goals stated in the first edition of TAP and refine the system’s goals. States are not expected to draft an entirely new strategic plan with different goals and initiatives. 
The TAP plan was up for review and re-approval during early 2018, anticipating a resubmission date in late spring 2018. At the October 2017 meeting, the Board expressed confidence that TAP’s goals were largely aligned with their current vision for the workforce system and that revisions to TAP would be small or corrective in nature and would not involve drastically rethinking system goals. The Board staff coordinated a process in December 2017-January 2018 that allowed all partner programs to reevaluate and propose amendments to their respective portions of the plan. To enable submission of the plan by the March 15, 2018 federal deadline, the Board released a revised plan for a 30-day comment period at a special meeting in February 2018, and issued final approval of the plan at their March 14 regular Board meeting.   
  
One major substantive change to the TAP plan reflected the entry into order-of-selection status by the state’s two vocational rehabilitation providers under Title IV of WIOA: the Division of Vocational Rehabilitation and the Department of Services to the Blind.  An index of all amendments to the TAP plan is available at:  http://wtb.wa.gov/Documents/IndexofProposedChangestoDraftPlanUpdate.pdf. 
Additional Information 
Further information on Washington’s approach to WIOA and the TAP strategic plan can be found on the Workforce Board’s planning webpage: :www.wtb.wa.gov/WAWorkforcePlan.asp, which provides committee meeting calendars materials and other details. 
CareerBridge.wa.gov and the Eligible Training Provider List 
The Workforce Board manages the state’s Eligible Training Provider (ETP) List and annually reviews the minimum performance standards used to evaluate each training program and determine eligibility from one year to the next. Current minimum standards set by the Workforce Board are as follows:  
. Completion rate — 20 percent 

. Employment rate — 50 percent 

. Earnings — $3,943 in a calendar quarter or $10.64 per hour. 


ETP programs are listed on the Workforce Board’s Career Bridge website (http://www.careerbridge.wa.gov). This website provides detailed information on over 6,500 Washington education and training programs, including apprenticeships. This includes both ETP-eligible and non-ETP eligible programs. Career Bridge provides easy access to state labor market data and a variety of career exploration tools. The site also allows visitors to sign in and register, and save their searches to a personal dashboard. 
Career Bridge clearly displays the employment and earnings outcomes of graduates of each training program, when data are available. The site also displays the industries where program graduates found jobs and provides a demographic snapshot of program participants — including age, gender, ethnicity and education level. These statewide educational “consumer reports” are one reason the site won a National Innovation Award from the Council of State Governments in 2010.  
Career Bridge also provides occupation-specific wage and demand information directly from the state’s labor market information website so users can view whether an occupation is growing and how much it pays before seeking training. Career Bridge averages over 28,000 monthly visits. Over the course of the program year, the website had over 6 million page views. 
 
  
State Policy Development 
Program Year 2016 and 2017 saw the development and issuance of 45 state-level WIOA WorkSource System policies and WorkSource Information Notices (WINs) (see Figure 3).   
Figure 3: WIOA Title I and WorkSource System Policies and WorkSource Information Notices (WINs) issued in Program Years 2016 and 2017. 
 
No. 
 Title 
 Issue Date 
 
PY16 
 WIOA Policies 
 
5205 
 Cash Depositories 
 01-25-2017 
 
5260 
 Allowable Cost and Prior Approval Requirements 
 12-23-2016 
 
5270 
 WIOA Title Formula Allocation Process and Methodology 
 07-26-2016 
 
5401 
 Adult and Dislocated Worker Fund Transfers (30% Allowance) 
 12-23-2016 
 
5405 
 Conflict of Interest 
 01-30-2017 
 
5413 
 Personnel Requirements and Compensation Limitations Under WIOA Title I 
 09-01-2016 
 
5601 
 Individual Training Accounts 
 12-23-2016 
 
5604 
 Rapid Response Additional Assistance 
 12-23-2016 
 
5607 
 Incumbent Worker Training Criteria 
 06-22-2017 
 
5609 
 Local Workforce Development Area Designation  
 01-27-2017 
 
5616 
 Customized Training 
 03-20-2017 
 
PY16 
 WorkSource System Policies 
  
 
1023 
 Integrated Service Delivery Policy and Operations Manual 
 04-04-2017 
 
PY16 
 WorkSource Information Notices (WINs) 
  
 
0027 
 Use of UI Customer Website 
 07-08-2016 
 
0042 
 PY 2017 Self Employment Training Demand Targets 
 05-09-2017 
 
0056 
 2017 Lower Living Standard Income Level 
 05-25-2017 
 
0073 
 WIOA Operating Guidance Issued to Date by DOL Through TEGLs and TENs 
 06-16-2017 
 
0075 
 Entry of Incumbent Workers into ETO 
 07-26-2016 
 
0077 
 WorkSource Services Catalog 
 06-30-2017 
 
0078 
 Provision of Title I Follow-up and Supportive Services Before and After Exit for Adults and Dislocated Workers 
 05-25-2017 
 
0081 
 Social Security Numbers (SSN) under WIOA Titles I and III and procedures for creating accounts in WorkSource Integrated Technology (WIT) when individuals do not provide SSN 
 06-26-2017 
 
0082 
 Real-Time Data Entry in the WorkSource Integrated Technology (WIT) System 
 02-14-2017 
 
0083 
 Application of Governor's Executive Order 17-01 to the State's One-Stop (WorkSource) System 
 02-28-2017 
 
0084 
 Supplemental State Guidance for the WIOA Title I Youth Program 
 06-22-2017 
 
0085 
 New Workforce Professionals Center Launch 
 05-31-2017 
 
0086 
 Enrollment of Homeless Veterans Program Participants into WIOA Workforce Programs at American Job Centers (AJCs) 
 06-21-2017 
 
0087 
 PY 2017 and FY 2018 WIOA Title I Program Allotments by WDA 
 06-30-2017 
 
PY17 
 WIOA Policies 
 
5260 
 Allowable Cost and Prior Approval Requirements 
 05-09-2018 
 
5404 
 Procurement and Selection of One-Stop Operators and Service Providers 
 10-02-2017 
 
5414 
 WIOA Title I Monitoring 
 10-06-2017 
 
5602 
 Supportive Services and Needs-Related Payments 
 10-03-2017 
 
5620 
 Follow-Up Services for Adult and Dislocated Worker Exiters  
 07-14-2017 
 
5621 
 Incentive Payments to WIOA Title I Participants 
 04-27-2018 
 
PY17 
 WorkSource System Policies 
 
1011 
 CASAS for Basic Skills Assessment 
 05-04-2018 
 
1019 
 Eligibility Guidelines and Documentation Requirements and Handbook 
 12-01-2017 
 

No. 
 Title 
 Issue Date 
 
PY17 
 WorkSource Information Notices (WINs) 
 
0027 
 Assisting Customers in Using the UI Claimant Website (eServices) 
 01/18/2018 
 
0042 
 PY 18 Self-Employment Training Demand Targets 
 05/03/2018 
 
0056 
 Lower Living Standard Income Level by Family Size 
 06/20/2018 
 
0073 
 WIOA Operating Guidance Issued to Date by DOL Through TEGLs and TENs and UIPLs 
 05/24/2018 
 
0077 
 WorkSource Services Catalog 
 05/25/2018 
 
0085 
 New Workforce Professionals Center Web Site to Launch 
 12/27/2017 
 
0087 
 PY17 and FY 18 WIOA Title I Program Allotments by Workforce Development Area 
 06/29/2018 
 
0088 
 Case Note Guidance 
 12/27/2017 
 
0089 
 Recording Youth Program Elements Provided to WIOA Title I Youth Participants by Non-WIOA Providers for WIOA Title I Federal Reporting 
 02/09/2018 
 
0090 
 Assisting UI Claimants in WorkSource Offices 
 03/23/2018 
 
0091 
 PY18 and FY19 WIOA Title I and III Allotments to the State and Local Workforce Development Areas 
 06/06/2018 
 

 
These policies and others that apply to the WIOA and WorkSource system policies can be found under Administration, State Policies and Guidance, on the Workforce Professional Center website located at https://wpc.wa.gov/adm/policy/state.  
Governor’s Statewide Activities Funds  
YouthWorks II 
The YouthWorks II grant authorized $2 million in local awards to provide internships and other work-based learning experiences for thousands of WIOA youth across the state, catalyzing leveraged resources to re-engage out-of-school youth, homeless teens, or those at risk of not graduating high school. The program was a partnership between ESD, the 12 WDCs, and the Washington Office of the Superintendent of Public Instruction. It used local connections between workforce development experts, local businesses, community-based organizations, and school district personnel to launch youth onto a path toward career planning and success. YouthWorks provided youth with opportunities to explore a range of career development services such as high school and beyond career plans, mentorships, employer internships, and other work-based learning activities at local businesses and post-secondary institutes. In addition to providing career support to at-risk youth, YouthWorks leveraged other resources to support local educators by providing them with externship opportunities to provide current industry knowledge, skills and career information into the classroom.  
As of grant completion, YouthWorks demonstrated excellent performance. Its statewide outcomes and collaborative modeling inspired the development of the Career Connect Washington initiative, which expanded local partnerships and activities such as apprenticeships. As of March 31, 2018, quarterly reports reflect the following YouthWorks outcomes:  
. Identified career pathways through high school and post-secondary education - 5,740 youth;  

. Connected to a business mentor or graduation coach — 2,364 youth;  

. Completed a 90-hour on-site business internship — 1,150 youth; and  

. Completed some type of other work-based training — 13,053 youth.  


Career Connect Washington 
Launching from the previous success of YouthWorks, the Career Connect Washington initiative was implemented statewide in January 2018. Career Connect Washington will create a permanent career connected learning system to expand youth registered apprenticeship, 
comprehensive internship, and career connected learning experiences in science, technology, engineering and math (STEM) and other high-demand fields — with a focus on low-income, rural, and youth of color. For PY17, $6.4 million of the Governor’s Statewide Activities Funds were allocated to launch 12 local Career Connect initiatives, galvanizing local workforce and education partnerships across Washington to increase opportunities and outcomes for WIOA youth. 
Twelve local Career Connect teams are in place across the state. Each team includes business, labor, schools, workforce councils, STEM Networks, state agencies and service providers. The Career Connect Washington Performance Review Team — consisting of five State agencies, a statewide private sector nonprofit, and the Governor’s office — assesses performance each quarter, provides unified leadership and makes funding decisions. Employment Security manages the local contracts on behalf of the state team. The 12 local Career Connect Teams must move 15,000 youth into career connected learning opportunities, including 1,500 in comprehensive employer internships or youth registered apprenticeships, before October 2019. The initiative is on track to exceed these goals, and each local team has set local performance targets to ensure the initiative as a whole succeeds. As of June 30, 2018, the project has produced 34,719 (213% of target) career connected learning experiences, 927 (80% of target) comprehensive internships, and 31 (78% of target) adult apprenticeships. Career Connect Washington includes youth apprenticeship, a new advancement for the state. To date, 13 youth are in registered apprenticeships; while this is behind target, it continues to gain momentum and is making significant statewide progress among partner agencies. 
TAP Accelerator: Upskill-Backfill 
Governor Inslee provided $2.4 million of WIOA Statewide Activities Funds to help accelerate implementation of Talent and Prosperity for All (TAP), Washington’s Combined State Plan. The State Workforce Development Board was tasked to consider projects incorporating elements that align with the Governor’s administrative priorities, specifically to incorporate the use of a strategy model identified as “Upskill-Backfill” to fund pilots or demonstrations that advance the implementation of goals in the State’s Combined State Plan. “Upskill-Backfill” joins public and business resources to improve the workplace skills of both incumbent workers and new hires — and creates a pathway to gainful employment and wage progression for our job-seeking Washingtonians, especially those at the lowest income levels or who have other disadvantages in the job market. 
For each project funded by Tap Accelerator:  
. Upskill-Backfill awards result in benefits to the employer, the incumbent workforce, and job seekers;  

. Businesses improve their productivity and competitiveness, to thrive and grow new jobs; and 

. Current workers have the opportunity to train (upskill) for promotional opportunities and higher wages, and to contribute to the stability and vitality of their workplace.  


The top priority for TAP Accelerator is to identify new or enhanced methods of reaching statewide goals identified in Washington’s TAP plan, implement and test the Upskill-Backfill concept, and when successful, catalyze permanent change to existing funding streams through WIOA core, combined and other system partners. As of June 30, 2018, 7 local projects have delivered at least 238 training completions (108% of target), 73 upskill employments (55% of target), and 96 backfill employments (107% of target). 
  
Sector Partnership National Emergency Grant 7/1/17 to 6/30/18  
Sector partnerships are collaborations of private industry, workforce and economic development organizations, education, labor and community-based organizations that work together to develop and implement strategies to close skill gaps. Under this grant, Washington’s 12 Workforce Development Councils will work in parallel with Governor Inslee’s eight sector leads to help identify skill gaps, develop broad-based industry partnerships that connect workers with the skills they need to obtain a job and build a career, and help businesses find skilled workers they need to stay competitive here in Washington. 
In 2015, Washington applied for and received a $6,930,000 grant to extend services to over 1,200 Dislocated Workers, and fill industry workforce gaps. In support of this effort, 126 businesses statewide committed to working with workforce partners to help build regional talent pipelines for middle-skill jobs. A no-cost extension continued the performance period until June 30, 2018. Middle-skill jobs make up the largest portion of the labor market and employers continue to struggle to find enough trained workers to fill their workforce needs. This Sector Partnership National Emergency Grant will help bridge the gap between worker skills and business needs by providing intensive services and enhanced career services. 
Final outcomes indicated services to 1,726 participants, including intensive services and enhanced career services to 1,269 individuals, training services to 827 individuals, and 989 participants exited to employment. Participating individuals, co-enrolled in other programs, continue to receive services funded by other sources. In this project our focus shifted away from on-the-job training (OJT), however, we exceeded the proposed number of trainings and accomplished 86 OJTs, 634 individual training accounts, 30 work experiences, 21 apprenticeships, 38 cohort trainings, and 57 incumbent worker trainings. Additionally, 368 people earned the distinction of a certificate or recognized credential. Washington is so thankful to have received this funding, which made a huge impact on the lives of many Washingtonians. 
Veteran Services 
With the nationwide focus on early engagement with transitioning service members (TSMs) and veterans to help them secure employment prior to leaving the military, the state continues to increase its focus and partnering to support this population. Washington has positioned a Disabled Veteran Outreach Program (DVOP) specialist on each of the five major military installations in the state. The DVOPs work closely with WIOA partners to co-enroll TSMs and veterans, primarily in the dislocated worker program. Additionally, a WorkSource affiliate site was established on Joint Base Lewis-McChord (JBLM) in 2017 to provide employment services through a network of partners, to not only TSMs, but to the entire working-aged military family. This team approach provides the TSM/veteran/military spouse a seamless set of services, such as retraining, that lead to living wage employment in the civilian sector.  
As dislocated worker status in itself doesn’t qualify a veteran for services in the state veterans program, WIOA often provides services to these TSMs, veterans and their spouses. To support this effort, the state and local workforce development councils continue to position WIOA specialists at JBLM and Fairchild Air Force Base near Spokane to augment the DVOP specialist at that location. At our three Navy bases, we have established a strong referral network between the DVOPs and WIOA staff. These positions and procedures not only provide additional services for TSMs, spouses and veterans working with the DVOP, but also ensure services to those who don’t qualify under the veterans program.  
WIOA is one of many partners that make up a strong network of services for TSMs and veterans in need. Others include the Washington Department of Veterans Affairs (WDVA), with programs such as the Homeless Veterans Reintegration Program (HVRP) to serve homeless veterans. In accordance with recent DOL/VETS guidelines, co-enrollment of HVRP participants 
in WIOA Title I programs will be increased and closely monitored to ensure effective partnering to support this population of veterans with significant barriers to employment. In Spokane and Everett, we have tasked DVOPs with WIOA Title I screening and enrollment, as a pilot, to explore the potential of eliminating a handoff for eligible veterans enrolled in both programs. If successful, we hope to expand this process to all WorkSource locations.  
Additional partnerships include the Washington Serves referral network for veterans in need of other barrier-removal services and the VETCORP Navigator program to help veterans transition from formal education into the civilian employment sector. Other partners in the network include veterans’ service centers, community colleges, private and non-profit organizations, coalitions and committees and administrators of county veterans’ relief funds. All partners, including WIOA, are critical to the safety net of wrap-around services provided to those who served. 
Lastly, we have successfully implemented three employer recognition programs: YesVets, Hire-a-Veteran, and the DOL HIRE Veterans Medallion Program, each of which acknowledges employers who are actively recruiting, hiring and retaining veterans in their workforce. 
Title III: Wagner Peyser Act Program (Employment Services) 
Wagner-Peyser employment services target individuals who historically need the most help finding work. In October 2014, while developing the state’s first state strategic plan under WIOA, Governor Jay Inslee challenged the state board and its partners to work together to help more people find and keep jobs that lead to economic self-sufficiency, with a focus on disadvantaged populations.  
Today, a number of initiatives are underway that use the strength of partnership to provide a wide array of services designed to help every Washingtonian experience the dignity of work.  
Strategies for Success 
Strategies for Success (SFS) is a six-week series of classes designed to teach job seekers the life and soft skills employers need. In SFS, students learn about time management, business communication, conflict management and problem solving. Funded by a DSHS grant for Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) clients, SFS is open to all job seekers who need to strengthen their life and/or soft skills so that they can find and retain employment.   
Over the last 20 months, 1,882 individuals enrolled in the SFS program. Seventy-six percent completed the program. Of those that left the program prior to completion, some left to take jobs or return to school.  
In a program like this, success can be difficult to quantify. However, the life changing stories of SFS students speak for themselves. Students report hope, renewed focus, a fresh outlook on life and their future career opportunities.  
Return to Work Program 
The Department of Labor & Industries (L&I) and the Employment Security Department partnered to develop the Return to Work Program. This partnership provides intensive job search support to workers who are unable to return to their former job due to an injury. 
The project’s genesis comes from U.S. Department of Labor research that says the longer injured workers stay unemployed, the harder it is for them to return to work. According to The International Association of Industrial Accident Boards and Commissions, the likelihood of going back to work after six months, is 50 percent, and after one year, the odds drop to less than 10 percent. The Return to Work project team works to mitigate those effects.  
  
Vocational counselors, medical providers, WorkSource staff, and L&I staff refer injured workers to the Return to Work team. The team then helps injured workers identify their skills, abilities and employment goals and develop a customized reemployment action plan. By connecting these workers to a wide network of partners, resources and services, workers receive the accommodations needed to help them return to gainful employment. 
Reverse Job Fairs 
The Division of Vocational Rehabilitation, the Department of the Navy, WorkSource and Kitsap County came together to host a one-of-a-kind event to promote the hiring of people with disabilities. 
This innovative event brought business solutions to businesses working to fill job openings with people who have disabilities. Over 25 employers received information on disabilities awareness, and had an opportunity to meet 25 job seekers that showcased their skills and talents via creative booth displays, live résumés and networking sessions.   
An image of a man named "Alex B" delivering his live resume.

Alex B delivering his live résumé. 

Inter-state Disability Employment Alliance (IDEA) – 2018 Business Forum 
Local vocational rehabilitation and state employment agencies in Washington and Oregon came together in October for an inter-state business forum event. This forum worked to connect employers with multiple government agencies that offer free services and programs designed to help companies succeed in hiring and retaining staff with disabilities. Business representatives also had an opportunity to meet local business colleagues and share best hiring practices. 
An image of Scott Bolon, PSNS HR Director, talking with Skyler Hinkle regarding services for those with disabilities such as skill assessment and training and/or job opportunities.
Scott Bolon PSNS HR Director talks with Skyler Hinkle. 

The goal of the event was to inform businesses in the Portland/Vancouver area of the many support services and accommodations available for those who have disabilities and are seeking work, and to introduce businesses to agency contacts that can provide services and consultation regarding the hiring, retention and advancement of people with both visible and invisible disabilities. 
Jumpstart to Employment  
The research overwhelmingly shows that employment following incarceration reduces the likelihood of an individual reoffending. The Department of Corrections, Employment Security, and community partners have come together to provide soon-to-be-released or recently released individuals with the tools needed to successfully find employment and reintegrate into society. 
A photo showing an event regarding the "Jumpstart to Employment" program for incarcerated individuals.
Jumpstart to Employment. 

The Jumpstart to Employment interactive workshop helps participants develop a master job application and targeted resume, search for jobs online and discuss their conviction history in an interview. Participants also practice interviewing and learn about services and resources available to them to help them find and retain employment. 
Section III – WIOA Title I and Title III Results 
This section includes the following about Washington’s WIOA Title I and Title III programs: 
. Performance results at the state level using state measures. 

. Information on the costs of workforce investment activities relative to the number of participants served. 

. State evaluations of workforce investment activities, including net-impact research and the annual workforce training results. 

. Negotiated performance levels and actual performance levels for Title I programs and Title III programs may be found in Appendix 2. 


Background 
WIOA Title I and Title III performance measures focus on the results for the portion of WorkSource customers who are registered for basic, individualized or training (only Title I) services funded under Title I and Title III. Separate Title I programs are operated for disadvantaged adults, dislocated workers and disadvantaged youth. Each program has its own measures for employment, education and training progress. 
Federal and state performance measures have precise definitions. Employment and earnings measures are based on wage records collected by state unemployment insurance (UI) systems for employer payroll taxes. Washington’s federal and state measures use UI wage records from the Employment Security Department (ESD). In addition, Washington participates in the Wage Record Interchange System (WRIS), which provides UI wage records from 49 other states and the District of Columbia. 
Some measures include information on enrollment in further education or training following program exit. This information is gathered by matching enrollment data supplied by different sources. Depending on the measure involved, these can include all or some of the following: the state’s two and four-year colleges, private career schools, apprenticeship programs and programs seeking eligibility as WIOA training providers. 
WIOA implemented a pilot performance measure to determine the effectiveness in serving employers. States were requested to select two of the three DOL pilot measures and could include additional state-defined employer measures. The state of Washington has chosen for the pilot period to report on the following for the Effectiveness in Serving Employer performance indicator: 
. Measure the repeated use rate for employers’ use of the core programs. 

. Measure the percent of employers that are using the core program services out of all employers represented in an area or state served by the system. 


Customer Satisfaction 
For many years, Washington has conducted customer satisfaction surveys on both participants and employers in alternating years, with the objective of assessing and measuring participant satisfaction with the workforce programs. The participant satisfaction core measure is the percentage of participants who report in the Participant Satisfaction Survey that they are satisfied overall with the programs. In the past, these surveys were scientifically conducted every two years using a random sample of participants from each program. Participation satisfaction rates consistently averaged around 90 percent across all programs from 2005 through 2013. The results of these surveys can be considered representative of the entire participant population on average. With the changeover to WIOA, the Workforce Board intends to complete the Employer Satisfaction Survey in 2019 and re-launch the Participant Satisfaction Survey in PY2019/2020. 
Additional Assessments 
Local Workforce Development Councils (WDCs) use a variety of customer feedback mechanisms and processes. These are a major source of ongoing program refinement and adjustment, which are not only more timely and reflective of larger samples than the state level surveys, but also tailored to local economies and issues. Comment cards, exit surveys, online and paper satisfaction surveys, and job fair and workshop feedback forms are all used in one or more local areas. The local processes for incorporating feedback into procedures and processes also vary by area. 
Evaluation Activities, Including Net Impact and Cost Benefit 
The legislation that established the Workforce Board called for the implementation of a comprehensive research program. This program continues under WIOA and is used to measure the results of federal and state workforce investment activities. The research effort encompasses four elements: 
1. Talent and Prosperity for All (TAP): Washington’s operational and program-specific workforce plan components, which incorporates research results from a variety of sources. 

2. Workforce training results: An evaluation of Washington state’s workforce development system, an annual study of the outcomes of participants from 12 workforce development programs, using a standard set of performance measures. 

3. Workforce training supply, demand and gaps: a biennial analysis of the supply of and demand for skilled workers in Washington. Some of these results are now updated in alternate years. For the most recent, see: https://wsac.wa.gov/sites/default/files/2017.ASkilledAndEducatedWorkforce.pdf 

4. A net impact study: conducted every four or five years, with results incorporated into Workforce Training Results reports. Initiation of the next study is anticipated during 2019. 


Publications reflecting the most recent research can be found at http://www.wtb.wa.gov/Pubs_Publications.asp 
Workforce Training Results Reports on the Following Three Groups of Programs: 
1. Programs for adults including community and technical college, job preparatory training, private career schools, apprenticeship, a state funded worker retraining program at community and technical colleges and WIOA dislocated worker services. 

2. Programs serving adults with barriers to employment including Adult Basic Education, WIOA adult services, Division of Vocational Rehabilitation, Department of Services for the Blind and TANF/WorkFirst.  

3. Programs serving youth, including secondary career and technical education and WIOA youth services. 


The report describes the demographics of each population and participant post-program employment outcomes. 
Washington currently uses standardized state core measures across its workforce programs, which focus on outcomes in the third quarter after program exit. The Workforce Training Results report also includes additional measures, such as hourly wage and hours worked (both Washington and Oregon UI systems record hours worked per quarter). Most recent as well as older results for exiting cohorts are found at: http://wtb.wa.gov/WorkforceTrainingResults.asp.  
  
Data Validation 
The Department of Labor waived data element validation activities during PY2017, between July 2017 and June 2018. The data element validation requirement was waived because of necessary software upgrades to the Department of Labor’s reporting system. 
Results and Analysis 
Washington state continues to address shortcomings in their relatively new case management system. While progress has been made, issues remain. 
System configuration weaknesses continues to compromise the accuracy of federal reporting. For example, measureable skill gains remains unreported. Consequently, the state of Washington cannot provide assurance that all required elements are reported uniformly so that a state-by-state comparison can be made. 
Cost Effectiveness 
In a broad sense, cost-effectiveness should be evaluated in an econometric net-impact analysis. The analysis should be designed to measure the costs and long-range results of services in order to compare participant outcomes with estimates of the outcomes in the absence of the program participation. The Workforce Board periodically conducts such studies, but not on an annual basis due to the significant cost. These studies are discussed in the evaluation activities segment later in this section. Basic accounting of costs and outputs is covered in the table below. 
Washington’s 12 workforce development areas (WDAs) spent $68.9 million on basic, individualized and training services during PY2017 (July 2017-June 2018). The programs served 130,605 participants. The average cost per WIOA participant was $528 for PY2017. Data for PY2017 are shown in Figure 4. 
Figure 4: Participants and expenditures in PY2017 
 
Target Population 
 PY2017 Participants 
 PY2017 Expenditures 
 Cost Per Participant1 
 
Adults 
 25,075 
 $13,531,434  
 $540  
 
Dislocated Workers 
 5,045 
 $21,532,445  
 $4,268  
 
Youth 
 3,822 
 $16,543,184  
 $4,328  
 
Wagner-Peyser 
 96,663 
 $17,339,049  
 $179  
 
Total 
 130,605 
 $68,946,112  
 $5282  
 

 
1This total is expenditures divided by participants to show cost per participant for that program. 
2This total is total expenditures divided by total participants to show cost per participant for all programs combined. 
Results for WIOA Adults 
Workforce Training Results evaluates the labor market outcomes of program participants using their employment and earnings during the third quarter after leaving a program. When considering these outcomes, please note that there is considerable change across years in the labor market conditions. 
The annual update of these analyses is underway, and the data for participants exiting for the most recently available year is published at: http://wtb.wa.gov/WIOAAdult2018Dashboard.asp 
  
Unemployment insurance wage files were used to examine employment rates and earnings among participants who left programs during recent program years.2 Data were collected from the unemployment insurance agencies in Washington and Oregon. Results are shown in Figure 5. 
2 Employment rates based on matches are lower than those based on survey results. Employment Security records do not contain information on self-employment. The reported rates exclude employment in states that are not included in our matching process. 
Figure 5: Employment and earnings of WIOA/WIA1 adult participants in the third quarter after leaving program 
 
Performance measure 
by exit year 
 2010-2011 
 2011-2012 
 2012-2013 
 2013-2014 
 2014-2015 
 2015-2016 
 
Employment rate2 
 67% 
 69% 
 69% 
 72% 
 70% 
 70% 
 
Employees in full-time job3 
 61% 
 60% 
 61% 
 59% 
 58% 
 62% 
 
Median quarterly hours3 
 442  
 443  
 450  
 455  
 448  
 449  
 
Median hourly wage4 
 $14.14  
 $14.85  
 $14.87  
 $14.37  
 $14.37  
 $15.19  
 
Median annualized earnings4 
 $23,346 
 $25,355 
 $25,786 
 $25,346 
 $25,389 
 $27,057 
 

 
1 The table includes data on both WIOA and WIA cohorts. 
2 These figures apply to those with employment reported to the state's Employment Security Department six to nine months after leaving program. Rate does not include self-employment, employment outside the Northwest or military service and thus understates total employment by approximately 10%. 
3 Full-time employment is defined as averaging 30 or more hours per week – percent is of those employed. 
4 Earnings/wages expressed in first quarter 2017 dollars in order to account for inflation. 
Results for WIOA Dislocated Workers 
In Figure 6, dislocated worker results vary with economic conditions and the characteristics of participants. Change can occur quickly from year to year as industrial conditions change and different groups of employees face layoffs. The most recently available data appears at: http://wtb.wa.gov/2018WIOADWDashboard.asp 
 
Figure 6: Employment and earnings of WIOA/WIA1 dislocated worker participants in the third quarter after leaving program 
 
Performance measure  
by exit year 
 2010-2011 
 2011-2012 
 2012-2013 
 2013-2014 
 2014-2015 
 2015-2016 
 
Employment rate2 
 65% 
 67% 
 73% 
 75% 
 74% 
 70% 
 
Employees in full-time job3 
 73% 
 73% 
 72% 
 73% 
 70% 
 68% 
 
Median quarterly hours3 
 488  
 484  
 481  
 484  
 483  
 480  
 
Median hourly wage4 
  $19.15  
  $18.92  
  $19.12  
  $18.98  
  $19.34  
  $19.10  
 
Median annualized earnings4 
 $35,964  
 $36,184  
 $35,229  
 $35,935  
 $36,472  
  $34,909  
 

 
1 The table includes data on both WIOA and WIA cohorts. 
2 These figures apply to those with employment reported to the state's Employment Security Department six to nine months after leaving program. Rate does not include self-employment, employment outside the Northwest or military service and thus understates total employment by approximately 10%. 
3 Full-time employment is defined as averaging 30 or more hours per week – percent is of those employed. 
4 Earnings/wages expressed in first quarter 2017 dollars in order to account for inflation. 
  
Results for WIOA Youth 
Figure 7 displays results for the WIOA Youth programs. The WIA figures include both older and younger youth. Labor market results are presented for participants who were not enrolled in secondary education at exit. The most recently available data appears at: http://wtb.wa.gov/2018WIOAYouthDashboard.asp 
Figure 7: Employment and earnings of WIOA/WIA1 youth participants in the third quarter after leaving program 
 
Performance measure  
by exit year 
 2010-2011 
 2011-2012 
 2012-2013 
 2013-2014 
 2014-2015 
 2015-2016 
 
Employment rate2 
 62% 
 63% 
 58% 
 62% 
 65% 
 63% 
 
Employees in full-time job3 
 36% 
 35% 
 32% 
 37% 
 33% 
 38% 
 
Median quarterly hours3 
 306  
 303  
 296  
 310  
 307  
 314  
 
Median hourly wage4 
  $10.81  
  $10.66  
  $10.73  
  $10.72  
  $11.20  
  $11.60  
 
Median annualized earnings4 
 $12,899  
 $12,706  
 $12,395  
 $12,941  
 $13,605  
 $14,072  
 

 
1 The table includes data on both WIOA and WIA cohorts. 
2 These figures apply to those with employment reported to the state's Employment Security Department six to nine months after leaving program. Rate does not include self-employment, employment outside the Northwest or military service and thus understates total employment by approximately 10%. 
3 Full-time employment is defined as averaging 30 or more hours per week – percent is of those employed. 
4 Earnings/wages expressed in first quarter 2017 dollars in order to account for inflation. 
Net Impact Analysis 
The state Workforce Board conducts periodic net impact and cost-benefit evaluations of key workforce programs in Washington state, including the three Title I WIOA programs. These evaluations compare the outcomes of program participants to their estimated outcomes had they not participated in a workforce development program, based on analysis of similar groups of non-participants. 
The next edition will be undertaken in 2019. For the WIOA programs, the methodology has been to draw comparison groups largely from Wagner-Peyser registrants on propensity-score matching (with replacement) with regression adjustment for residual differences. 
The results of past studies can be found in Workforce Training Results reports at http://wtb.wa.gov/Pubs_Publications.asp  under “Archived Publications”. 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Washington’s Workforce Development Councils – A Summary Overview Showing Highlights for each Individual WDC 
 

This is a map showing the WDC areas and the 12 WDAs.  The map also shows the individual counties for these areas.  This is the front page of the "Highlights of Washington's Workforce Development Councils" Appendix for the WIOA Annual Performance Report for PY2017
 
To ensure that the workforce system is focusing on the local economy, each of the 12 WDCs oversee their respective areas. They are the strategic visionaries for local implementation of WIOA legislation and funds. WDCs have several important functions in the public workforce system. They determine how many one-stop centers, affiliate and connection sites are needed in their respective area, where they will be located and how those sites will be operated. In addition, WDCs analyze workforce information to identify targeted industries and determine where talent gaps exist in order to strategically develop and execute strategies to address workforce needs with their regional partners. They serve as the local workforce development system lead with the regional business community. WDCs play a key leadership role in pursuing and coordinating public and private resources to support local workforce development strategies. 
At least 50 percent of WDC membership is comprised of business leaders from key sectors appointed by Chief Elected Officials (CEOs). CEOs are the local area WIOA Title I grant recipients. They partner with WDCs to administer WIOA legislation and funds, as well as oversee local WorkSource system. WDCs are the system’s portal into the business community and are responsible for leading, coordinating and facilitating multiple interagency initiatives, projects and programs. 

This is a small image of a map showing the areas served by the Olympic Consortium Workforce Development Council which are Clallam, Jefferson and Kitsap counties.

 

Olympic Consortium  Workforce Development Council 
Serving Clallam, Jefferson and Kitsap counties 
3rd Annual Awareness and Networking Event 
Silverdale, Washington – The Olympic Workforce Development Area (WDA) serves the residents of Clallam, Jefferson and Kitsap counties. One of the highlights of this year’s many hiring events was the 3rd Annual Awareness and Networking Event – Becoming DisAbility Confident. This was not an average hiring event; it was a business engagement, employer/job seeker unique networking event with an unconventional twist. Employers at this year’s event, held in Silverdale Washington, had the opportunity to hear qualified in-person resumes directly from the job seekers. Employers learned more about how to access, hire and advance people with disabilities. Each job seeker was able to share their professional background and skills with employers. The Olympic Workforce Development Council (WDC) appreciates the effort of our WorkSource, Division of Vocational Rehabilitation and Department of the Navy partners. 
The event was a success. 
. There were 26 job seekers who presented and staffed a table. 

. Over 40 employers participated and all job seekers met with two or more employers. Keep in mind the employers generally only go 



to candidates that match their need. There were presentations, and previous managers of participants from last year were on hand to speak about the process. 

. Some employers made job offers on the spot!  


Exploring Options for Apprenticeship Development in the Olympic WDA 
The Olympic WDA is interested in providing more pathways to living-wage jobs in industries that will continue to grow and contribute to the economic and comprehensive health of our communities. Our analysis shows that there are specific challenges associated with expanding access to apprenticeship in rural counties: 
. Low population density and small number of new job openings at the apprentice level. It’s difficult to support a structure to serve 2-3 people at a time. 

. Many rural employers are often smaller and have fewer resources to invest in training. Wages are sometimes lower, and employers feel they need to hire “fully trained” employees. 


One potential opportunity that the Olympic WDA is exploring is expanding the Apprenti Technology Apprenticeship Program into Kitsap County (and potentially the entire WDA). We hope to create partnerships among a variety of public and private employers across the WDA to create a pilot class of technology apprentices this year. So far, we’ve conducted assessments of the education, training, infrastructure and employment landscapes in our WDA, met with key public and private employers to more fully understand the barriers and concerns that need to be addressed to launch a technology apprenticeship program in our area, and conducted outreach to various partners who could contribute to the effort. In addition, we worked with representatives from Apprenti, 

Kitsap Economic Development Alliance, and Olympic Educational Service District 114 to develop a survey that will be distributed to both public and private sector employers in Kitsap, Clallam, and Jefferson counties.  
High School Outreach in the  Olympic WDA 
Ben D. Compton 
Career Connection Specialist 
Kitsap WorkSource 
When I first came to the Washington State Employment Security Department (ESD), there was a lot of discussion regarding how we could better educate the public about who we are and what we do. I raised my hand and asked, “How, or more appropriately, WHEN are they supposed to learn about us? Why not get down into the schools and begin there?” At that time there was not a lot of support for that idea because we would have no way to compile data for students. Fortunately, my supervisor was supportive enough to allow me to do a little bit of outreach to one local high school. Through the course of a school year, I would speak in one of their career and technical education (CTE) classes that is designed around ‘real-world’ budgeting prep and career choices. This allowed me to talk to about 120 students within the school year. 
2017 School Visits 
During PY17, visits were made to 19 schools and youth programs where speaking events were delivered and information was relayed to about 4,000 students. This year the goal is to speak to 27 schools and youth programs with an outreach to around 6,500 students before the end of the school year. 
As a member of the local West Sound CTE Consortium, a group of all CTE counselors from the high schools and Olympic College, success was achieved because: 
a) The need for engagement with students was identified and placed as a priority. 

b) Management is very supportive. 


Student Outreach 
The demand from schools is fulfilled by providing labor market representation and engagement in speaking with their students and answering their questions on current and predicted labor market topics such as: 
. What is WorkSource? 

. The need to replace “college ready” with “career ready.” 

. Saturation of college graduates in the labor market. 

. Absolute necessity to perform labor market research prior to choosing a field of study at a college or university (and WE are the #1 source for that!). 

. Vocational/trades crisis. 

. All choices are equally valuable, honorable and needed (college, trades and military). 

. Resumes, interviewing, job searching. 

. Attending all college and career fairs. 


Being able to answer students’ questions and guide them establishes us as the experts in these areas. This is especially helpful since there is a requirement now to have a completed resume prior to graduation. Some schools do not know how to teach what a modern, skills-based resume is so they are happy to have the partner relationship with the Olympic WDC. 
 
Outreach Methods 
. Invites to speak to various classes (usually CTE) about WorkSource, current and future labor market, resumes and interviewing etc. 

. Performing outreach to various CTE groups, administrators, community groups (Kiwanis, non-profits etc.). 

. Created WorkSource-based curriculum taught within our local Kitsap Alternative Transition School (KATS) three times per year. 

. Middle school presentations designed around more basic concepts. 

. Member of four different CTE Advisory Boards in four school districts. 


Objectives 
. Educate youth, their parents and educators regarding the realities of the current and future labor market. 

. Establish WorkSource as the “face of the labor market”, the experts, for today’s youth and tomorrow’s workforce. 

. Create a true partnership with all local schools and youth programs wherein WorkSource works alongside schools as a sort of “warm hand-off” between the schools and WorkSource. 


Goals 
. WorkSource is a presence in every local high school, middle school and college just like other school staff. We are brought in as part of the post-graduation plan and work as equal partners in preparing students for the transition from school to the workforce. 

. Every student is required to register on WorkSource, download a resume on WorkSource, perform some basic curriculum assignments (labor market research, career exploration, how to find your local WorkSource no matter where you live.). 


Proposals 
. Work with the Superintendent of Public Instruction to formally support the use of WorkSource within our local schools since, again, the whole point of school is to prepare them to transition from an educational environment and into the workforce. 


It is a firm belief that the above work will make a significant and positive impact on tomorrow’s workforce, create a more productive, efficient, relevant and stronger WorkSource, and most importantly, a more vibrant and successful community and economy.  
Grant Helps Opportunity Youth 

This is an image of Jeff Allen, Director of Youth Services, Olympic Educational Service District 114.
 
Jeff Allen, Director of Youth Services  
Olympic Educational Service District 114 
Bremerton, Washington OWDC WIOA-Youth contractor, Olympic Educational Service District 114, was awarded a U.S. Department of Labor (DOL) YouthBuild Grant. In their first cohort, 15 opportunity youth received 
education and job readiness training in the construction trades, participated in several community service projects and received case management targeted at reducing barriers towards achieving their education and employment goals.  
Community partnerships has been a key component to YouthBuild Kitsap’s early success. Youth have engaged in service projects with Kitsap County Parks, Bremerton Foodline, One Heart Wild Animal Sanctuary and the Bremerton Backpack Brigade. In collaboration with the United Way of Kitsap County and the Kitsap Builders Association, YouthBuild Kitsap students constructed a “tiny shelter” to be used in the Kitsap County Homes for All project serving homeless individuals in the county. 
In addition to several students earning their GED and industry-recognized certifications, two youth enrolled in Job Corps to continue their education and job training. 
 
Kitsap Community Resources/South Kitsap WorkSource Affiliate-Olympic WDA 
Austin’s Success Story 
This is an image of a man named Austin who is the success story for the Kitsap Community Resources/South Kitsap, WorkSource Affiliate of the Olympic WDA.  Austin went through the WIOA Adult program and is now a successful truck driver and his employer is thrilled to get him!
Austin came in to the WIOA Adult orientation at the South Kitsap WorkSource Affiliate in January 2018 and said that he wanted to go to truck driver training. He had gone down the wrong path as a teenager and was getting his 
life on track, and was working a low-wage seasonal job. He had already saved $3,000 toward the cost of the training (which is now over $5,000). However, he didn’t have his high school diploma so his case manager asked him to do some research to see if trucking employers would be willing to hire him without a diploma or GED. He followed through and found that about a third of these employers would be willing to hire him, and provided all the documentation the program requested. He was enrolled in WIOA Adult at the beginning of February and began training the following week. He received the most glowing weekly progress reports from the trainer that we have ever seen, and graduated at the top of his class, only missing one point on his exam. At the age of 24, he is now gainfully employed as a truck driver with Kitsap Septic and expects this will be his lifelong career. He also tells everyone he knows about our program, and plans to go back to school to complete his GED with his newfound sense of accomplishment. He loves his new job and his employer is very happy to have him. 

This is a small image of a map showing the areas served by the Pacific Mountain (PacMtn) Workforce Development Council which are Grays Harbor, Lewis, Mason, Pacific and Thurston counties.
 
Pacific Mountain Workforce Development Council 
Serving Grays Harbor, Lewis, Mason, Pacific and Thurston counties 
Work-Based Learning — Military Transition 
Since 2015, the partners of Camo2Commmerce (C2C), located at Joint Base Lewis-McChord, have been focused on work-based learning initiatives. Initially launching the 
Corporate Fellowship Program in partnership with the U.S. Chamber Foundation — Hiring Our Heroes (HOH). The 12-week program provided those transitioning, including spouses, an opportunity to build hands-on civilian experience with corporate partners prior to transitioning from the military. The cohort model has since expanded to include 14 additional installations across the country, many of which are working with local workforce development agencies. While C2C partners continue to support the program locally, the program has officially transitioned over to HOH, and expects to operate for many years to come. 
An image of staff in a group photo: Camo2Commmerce (C2C), located at Joint Base Lewis-McChord, have been focused on work-based learning initiatives. Initially launching the Corporate Fellowship Program in partnership with the U.S. Chamber Foundation — Hiring Our Heroes (HOH). 
Following up the success of the Corporate Fellowship Program, the partners of C2C launched two new work-based learning programs: Work-Ex and Spouse Ambassador Program. Work-Ex is an individualized model that provides a 4 to 12-week internship with small to large employers in everything from IT to Healthcare. In some cases, the program has aligned with the launch of an apprenticeship. Work-Ex was launched July 2017, placing 48 veterans into internships, and to date, 34 have transitioned into full-time employment. 
A group photo of staff and Senator Murray celebrating the success of The Ambassador Program as part of an initiative to focus on spouses called the “Year of the Spouse”, which has also included the hosting of U.S. Senator Murray for a roundtable focused on spouses, among many other efforts.
 
The Spouse Ambassador Program launched at the end of May 2018. The cohort model has provided an opportunity for nine spouses to gain experience in workforce development, general administration, and outreach. Five of the spouses have gained full-time employment, and three of the remaining are actively interviewing for opportunities. The Ambassador Program is a part of an initiative to focus on spouses called the “Year of the Spouse”, which has also included the hosting of U.S. Senator Murray for a roundtable focused on spouses, among many other efforts. 
Summer Youth Internship Project — DVR Partnership 
Within this project, PacMtn received funds from the Division of Vocation Rehabilitation to seek to develop and lead successful workforce development strategies for in school youth and young adults between the ages of 16-21 with active IEP/504 plans. These youth and young adults gain 

work experience, develop work readiness skills and prepare for post high school careers and additional educational opportunities. Classroom training is provided by our AmeriCorps members who work directly in the WIOA Youth programs — great leverage! 
PacMtn identified two strategic partnerships with Arc of Grays Harbor and Morningside to align their expertise in working with youth and young adults with disabilities and enhance opportunities for students in rural and high poverty areas. This 2018 program year we served 39 youth and young adults within this project. 

A photograph of a participant with his certificate from the Arc of Grays Harbor and Morningside which aligns youth and young workers with disabilities to enhance opportunies for students in rural and high poverty areas.
 
This project and partnership has been successful in increasing direct connections for students to the labor market, entry into career pathways, increased education and comprehensive work experience training and improved students’ outcomes through: 
. Attainment of workplace readiness training certification through the PacMtn Uplift! Work Readiness Training. 
. Attainment of work experience internships within their communities. 
. Measurable progress in training opportunities. 
. Completion of student portfolios and final evaluations. Portfolios contain such things as career assessment tests, strength identifiers, resumes, employer evaluations and student reflections. 

A photograph of participant with his certificate from the Arc of Grays Harbor and Morningside which aligns youth and young workers with disabilities. This student received services through the UpLift program and work readiness training program.
  
Expanded Service Delivery System and Integrated Service Delivery 
In January 2018, PacMtn WDC expanded its WorkSource system to a more distributed service delivery model. This allows service providers, customers, clients and content to be located in different, non-centralized locations so that service provision can occur independent of time and place. This also helps to further utilize multi-modalities including web-based instruction, streaming video conferencing, face-to-face classroom/counseling time, distance learning through video, or other combinations of electronic and traditional methods. One of the primary partners in this design is Timberland Regional Library, which has opened its doors to be a WorkSource Connection site — expanding our reach into 27 different locations. PacMtn’s distributed service design should increase access to the full range of services available in our region, whether residents are looking to find jobs, build 
basic educational or occupational skills, earn a post-secondary certificate or degree, or obtain guidance on how to make career choices. 
Each WorkSource has committed to a quality improvement plan intended to facilitate an action plan that will improve outcomes established by the One-Stop Operator. That One-Stop Operator is a 3-member collaborative with executive representation from the regional Chamber of Commerce, Employment Security and PacMtn. The collaborative drives change and integration focusing on these priorities: 
. Shared governance and decision-making. 

. Professional development of WorkSource staff. 

. “Voice of the Customer” emphasis and increased advocacy for the dual customer. 

. Integration and alignment of all partner efforts and programs for the betterment of customer outcomes. 

. Solutions that serve business and industry needs.


This is a small image of a map showing the areas served by the Northwest Workforce Council which are Island, San Juan, Skagit and Whatcom counties.
Northwest Northwest Workforce Council 
Serving Island, San Juan, Skagit and Whatcom counties 
Integrating Services While Enhancing Access for all Populations 
The workforce system partners undertook a comprehensive review of customer flow and customer experience and expectations for center activities throughout the Northwest region. The resulting service flow model was informed by customer voice, best and/or promising practices. Under leadership of Northwest Workforce Council, the partnership began testing and implementing components of the conceptual design to enhance access for all customer groups throughout the region. 
Center Modernizations 
Extensive remodeling and refurnishing of two WorkSource centers incorporated the partnership’s customer flow design, access review results, and architectural best practices to build highly accessible spaces. Full ADA compliance is complemented with friendly, welcoming and motivating environments, efficient use of space, visibility and ease of access to staff. 
Access Review 
The board’s Regional Access Advisory Committee conducted a comprehensive access review of the region’s three comprehensive WorkSource centers, with a focus on programmatic access as well 
 
as physical plant access. The results helped to inform alteration of physical structure, signage and furnishings. 
Enhanced Program Access  
New, dedicated workspace within the centers for partner programs’ onsite presence affords customers predictable and consistent access to non-resident workforce and support services. Online-published calendars ensure staff make accurate referrals to visiting program staff and facilitate customers’ choice in accessing services via the one-stop centers. 
Referral System 
Enhancements to customer flow to and from programs and services was redefined in the partners’ new Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) and further developed in the customer flow model. Significant new work was accomplished this year in updating essential referral information on the regional workforce system’s shared knowledge management platform – DAWN (Dynamically Aligned Workforce Network). The re-design of the referral guides presents key information in a logical, easy-to-find format that allows staff to efficiently provide customers accurate information. The program referral menu organizes information by service instead of by agency. This allows staff to either present an array of options or locate the most appropriate option for which the job seeker may be eligible.  
The information platform (DAWN) is accessible to all partner staff in real time and provides the essential information, criteria, and contact information to make accurate and timely referrals to workforce system programs and services. 
Building the Apprenticeship Pipeline 
Northwest Workforce Council (NWC) has a sustained continued commitment to elevating pre-apprenticeship and apprenticeship as  
 
effective workforce preparation options through a number of successful initiatives that support access to these work-based programs and high-wage employment. 
WAVE Tour 
The Council partnered with eight registered apprenticeship programs for the Washington Apprenticeship Vocational Education (WAVE) Tour that exposed 354 high school students, teachers, and counselors to careers in the building trades. It was hosted at three Apprenticeship Technical Training Centers in the Northwest region: Electricians (Northwest Washington Electrical Industry JATC Training Center), Carpenters (North Puget Sound Carpenters Training Center), and Plumbers and Pipefitters (NW Washington Pipe Trades JATC Training Center). 
Pre-Apprenticeship Boot-Camp 
Creating access for underserved population to self-sufficient employment in the region’s key industry sectors, NWC funded pre-apprenticeship construction trades “boot camp” training for WIOA eligible youth, adult, and dislocated workers, of which 89% were females. This full-time, hands-on program equipped participants with the skills needed by employers in the growing construction sector. Wrap-around services were provided and included transportation assistance and childcare. Graduates earned industry-recognized credentials and received instruction in safe and proper use of hand and power tools, trades math, and fitness and nutrition for the trades. Eighty-eight percent (88%) of those who started the classes completed successfully and entered training-related employment. 

A photograph of women who completed training programs via Pre-Apprenticeship Boot-Camp, Dirject entry Pre-Apprenticeship training and Career Connected Learning opportunities.
Direct entry Pre-Apprenticeship 
NWC has sponsored another unique opportunity: a “direct entry” pre-apprenticeship training class in partnership with Pacific Northwest Ironworkers & Employers Joint Apprenticeship Training Program #86, bringing this training program to northwest Washington for the first time. The 4-week class graduated 11 students (85%). Graduates formally entered into the Ironworkers Apprenticeship program and were dispatched the following week to jobs starting $24.31 per hour with benefits. NWC will continue to support this work-based training model with a second Ironworker pre-apprenticeship cohort getting underway in the current program year. 
Career Connected Learning 
NWC is also a partner in the statewide Career Connect Apprenticeship Expansion Initiative, planning and supporting new pre-apprenticeship and apprenticeship training opportunities. The initiative enabled a partnership with one of Island County’s largest manufacturers, Nichols Brothers Boat Builders, to expand five existing apprenticeship programs and start two new apprenticeship programs. In its first six months, 16 new apprentices have started their training. 
NWC remains committed to continuing to promote pre-apprenticeship and apprenticeship opportunities throughout the coming year as an excellent work-based vocational training option for underserved populations, leading to high-wage jobs for graduates and providing businesses the skilled workers they need. 
Serving Young Adults 
Many jobs of the future in Washington will require post high school education and will be in the high-demand science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) fields. To bridge the skill gap for many underrepresented young adults in our community, Northwest Workforce Council (NWC) is co-leading the Career Connect Learning Project in the Northwest with the regional STEM network. STEM skills are an essential need for NWC’s key sectors: manufacturing, construction and health services. 
Of the multiple pathways to STEM careers, NWC has focused on increasing access to career learning opportunities for young adults. NWC has been addressing local need by providing young adults experiences such as comprehensive career plans, internships, job shadows, informational interviews, pre-apprenticeships, and other technical training support that will put them in position to enter high-demand STEM careers. 
To that end, this past year, WIOA eligible young adults received 115 internships with a comprehensive career plan and adult mentoring. Four young adults entered a registered apprenticeship. In addition, NWC has provided an additional 606 distinct career-connected learning activities including worksite visits and career preparation workshops. In collaboration with Skagit STEM network school districts and the Mount Vernon Chamber Foundation’s Experience Work Project, other high school students received 547 career-connected learning activities as a result of this initiative. All the Career Connect experiences are linked to business demand and to the expectations of the world of work. 
 
This is a small image of a map showing the areas served by the Workforce Snohomish WDC which serves Snohomish County.
Workforce Snohomish Workforce Development Council 
Serving Snohomish County 
Business Sector Engagement 
Workforce Snohomish (WFS) engages businesses through an industry sector strategy and leveraging our WorkSource Business Solutions Team. WFS held six business-led, sector-specific roundtable events engaging 154 participants to hear first-hand from employers about their biggest challenges related to hiring and retaining a qualified workforce. Specific sectors were tied to the Snohomish County Executive’s Economic Development Initiative. Through these conversations, we were able to identify and prioritize common themes across industries. 
As a direct result of roundtable feedback, WFS held workshops for businesses related to internships/ apprenticeships to help establish and/or enhance programs, and demystify the process. For the manufacturing sector, WFS also hosted a panel of education and training providers to discuss how businesses can partner with or leverage existing community resources. 
Business Solutions Consortium 
WFS and the WorkSource Snohomish County Business Solutions Team developed a Business Solutions Consortium made up of partners across the system, including post-secondary 
education, community based organizations, direct service providers for target populations, Employment Security Department, and ResCare Youth Services. The consortium meets monthly to discuss strategies related to business outreach, employment trends, and address gaps within the workforce system. The Consortium was chosen as one of only eight participants in the U.S. Department of Labor Employment and Training Administration National Business Engagement Cohort, tasked with refining business services integration best practices while building integration assessment tools for use on a national scale. Serving Targeted Populations WFS launched a WorkSource system Mobile Career Specialist to increase reach to job seekers in the community. The Mobile Career Specialist provides services at offsite locations, and has expanded outreach efforts at professional networking events, workshops, community colleges, job fairs, and hiring events. As a result, WIOA information and services are available at more convenient, remote, and accessible locations across the county reaching a higher number of prospective enrollees. WorkSource Snohomish County also has specialized services available to veterans and youth. There were over 2,600 visits last year to the veteran-focused Serve Center located at WorkSource Everett. The Serve Center is staffed by former military members who are trained to help veterans and their families with their unique needs, including resource connection and job search assistance. The Serve Center also houses WFS Homeless Veterans Reintegration Program (HVRP), Local Veterans Employment Representative, and Disabled Veterans Case Managers.  The WorkSource Youth Center assists individuals ages 14 to 24 with programs to complete their GED, take part in Career Connected Learning opportunities, and gain life skills. The Youth Center’s clients often 
come from disadvantaged backgrounds with high barriers to success, including a lack of housing, domestic issues, legal concerns, physical/mental health problems, and substance abuse. The Center has dedicated staff who are skilled in building the relationships necessary to enhance a client’s likelihood of success. 
Serving Individuals with Barriers 
WFS is a partner on Creating Access to Careers in Healthcare (I-CATCH), a program focused on providing access to healthcare careers for people receiving Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) benefits. WFS Employment & Education Navigators provide assistance to individuals who are interested, pursuing, or have graduated from the I-CATCH program. Quarterly employer panels and hiring events are held for students and those interested in healthcare careers.  
WFS has an Employment Navigator and AmeriCorps member working on the Disability Employment Initiative (DEI) focused on helping individuals with disabilities secure and retain employment. 
The Homeless Youth Work Housing Integration Program (WHIP) Employment Navigator works with homeless youth to help stabilize them through employment. Working on-site at Cocoon House (the local teen homeless shelter and housing provider) and the WorkSource Youth Center, the Navigator connects with teens and young adults who are in need of specialized attention and connects them to education, jobs, and life skills programs. 
Work-based Learning 
WFS collaborated with Snohomish County Labor Council to hold two Trade UP events. Trade UP is a one day, hands-on introduction to skilled trade careers for 
high school students. Over 200 students from the Everett and Marysville school districts were able to meet trade workers and learn about apprenticeship options that can lead to high-paying, stable careers.  
Students experience cement masonry first-hand at Trade UP. WFS also partnered with WorkSource, a host of labor organizations, school districts, community colleges, and businesses to host the county’s first Apprenticeship Celebration Event. Over 300 students and job seekers listened to a panel of apprentices, participated in hands-on activities, and met with apprenticeship and pre-apprenticeship representatives. The Governor’s Youthworks funding enabled WFS to launch the SnoCoYouthworks.org website providing youth and young adults connections to opportunities including mentorships, internships, and jobs. The Re-Imagine Retail grant funded by Chicago Cook Workforce Partnership and the Walmart Foundation provided job seekers and students a chance to obtain National Retail Association Rise Up certifications and/or certificates in customer service and management at Everett Community College. The grant provided funding for on-the-job training as well as internships. 
A photograph of students who experienced cement masonry first-hand at Trade UP. This images shows them working hands on outdoors with tools and materials of the trade.

This is a small image of a map showing the areas served by the Seattle-Kiong County Workforce Development Council which serves all of King County.

 

Seattle-King County Workforce Development Council of Seattle-King County 
Serving King County 

Overview 
Program Year 2017 (PY17) was another successful year for the Seattle-King County region. Through the local WorkSource network of 46 locations (two centers, six affiliates and 38 connection sites), the Workforce Development Council (WDC) of Seattle-King County served 31,334 community members. Under the Integrated Service Delivery (ISD) model, 9,249 individuals received Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA) Adult services. Of these, 93% received Adult Basic services and the remaining 7% were enrolled in individualized services. Despite record low unemployment in the Puget Sound, 715 dislocated workers were also served this year. Even in good economic times, there are still many looking for work who face significant barriers to employment. These include youth, English language learners, individuals with justice system involvement, individuals with disabilities, people experiencing homelessness and others. The WorkSource system’s core purpose is to help people overcome obstacles to employment and self-sufficiency. It is more important than ever to have a robust network of employers to truly understand the area’s business climate and to be able to refer qualified job candidates to meet those needs. In 

PY17, 1,816 regional businesses received specialized service from the Business Services Team, resulting in thousands of career pathway opportunities for job seekers and developing solid employer relationships with the WorkSource system. Integrated Services  The WDC of Seattle-King County has been a local and regional leader in innovative strategies for Integrated Service Delivery — placing emphasis on customer need over processes and systems. WorkSource Summit On Friday, December 8, 2017, the WDC and WorkSource Seattle- King County hosted a summit dedicated to best practices and resources for staff and partners from across the state of Washington. The WorkSource Operator Team facilitated a planning committee, designing the day to address best practices and practical resources for Integrated Service Delivery. Over 150 attendees from six workforce development areas (WDAs) participated in 
An image of the WorkSource Summit event held in December 2017 by the WorkSource Seattle-King County and the WDC.  It shows people presenting at a podium and marketing materials for the event. It was a huge success.
the day-long conference. Teams and individuals participated in keynote sessions and eight breakout workshops; 15 presenters shared lessons learned and strategies to enhance the quality of services provided for community members by adopting the collaborative principles of integrated services. 
Featured Innovation: Functional Teams  

An image of multiple staff members from WorkSource Auburn holding motivational signs to celebrate the success of four funtional teams dedicated to increased coordination and collaboration within WorkSource Seattle-King County.
WorkSource Auburn staff sharing collaborative values 
As a part of Integrated Service Delivery strategies and structures, the WDC of Seattle-King County has celebrated the success of four functional teams dedicated to increased coordination and collaboration within WorkSource Seattle-King County to maximize system capacity. The teams are: Customer Engagement with 14 members, In-Community Outreach with 27 members, Facilitator Team with 10 members, and over 20 staff on the Leadership Team. Successes include the emergence of job clubs focused on serving specific barriered populations such as job clubs for Mature Workers, Men, Women, Veterans, and a Multicultural Job Club. Programs have included a Women & Work Empowerment Forum and a LinkedIn Workshop. These experiences are tailored to job seekers’ unique needs on their pathway to success.  
Business and Sector Engagement 
Every two years, the WDC evaluates which industries are identified as focus and watch sectors with critical workforce demand. At the start of PY17, the evaluation for 2017-2019 was released with focus sectors identified as: healthcare, manufacturing (including aerospace and maritime), construction (including energy efficiency), professional-scientific-technical services, information technology; and watch sectors such as the public sector (public administration), transportation-warehousing (including logistics and supply chain management) and trade (including wholesale and retail). 
Of the 1,816 businesses engaged, 767 were new to WorkSource and 1,308 businesses were within focus and watch sectors. 
Serving Youth and Barriered Populations 
The Seattle-King County region works with both community member and business customers to develop innovative career pathways for populations that experience barriers to employment. Within the past year, an estimated 3,280 individuals with disabilities, 1,877 people experiencing homelessness, and 2,347 veterans or veterans’ spouses have been served in the region’s overall WorkSource network. 
Youth and young adults in many of the communities in Seattle-King County face significant barriers to employment and/or education attainment. Two new service providers, Seattle Goodwill Industries and the Boys & Girls Club, brought a fresh infusion of partners, locations and services with a geographic model serving King County where resources are needed most. The annual youth employment, education and career fair hosted over 280 young people, resulting in 54 contingent offers of employment. An additional 21 events were hosted throughout the year to connect youth with jobs that connect to career pathways. 
Youth-Focused Affiliate Site, American Job Center Network  
Within the program year, WorkSource Seattle-King County certified and opened doors to a new youth-focused WorkSource Affiliate site, WorkSource Affiliate Tukwila, centrally located in south King County as a part of the American Job Center Network. 
Customer Success: Youth Services, Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act Marjina is 22 years old, with recent success in education and training through WorkSource Affiliate Tukwila’s YouthSource programs in January 2018. Facing extensive challenges in her community and family, including violence and gang activity, Marjina chose to not continue high school after the 9th grade. After six years of engaging in criminal activity to survive, Marjina returned to school and sought out WorkSource Affiliate Tukwila as a resource. Her main goal has been achieving self-sufficiency to put an end to her experience of generational poverty. In only six months, Marjina completed her GED and participated in Renton Technical College’s graduation ceremony. Marjina also completed an internship at the City of SeaTac, as well as extensive occupational skills training. Marjina’s drive, motivation, resilience and skill are an inspiration to her community and to youth everywhere. She is currently participating in King County’s “Lift Every Youth” internship, an intensive leadership training program. At the conclusion of her internship, she will pursue a college education and employment with the support of WorkSource Affiliate Tukwila and her case manager. 

This is an image of a young 22 year old adult with recent success in education and training through WorkSource Affilate: Tukwila's YouthSource Program in January 2018. She gained her GED and completed an internship at the City of SeaTac.
The 46 total locations of WorkSource Seattle-King County serve the region’s unemployed and underemployed community members with 38 of those sites certified as Connection Sites in partnership with community-based organizations that directly serve people within focus populations of the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act. Over 1,000 workshops with 7,742 participants were held at Connection Sites within the year, with 1,090 referrals given to center and affiliate sites.  
Work-based Learning: Career Connect Seattle-King County 
The WDC of Seattle-King County and the Seattle Region Partnership received an award of $1.3 million in competitive grant funds from Washington state’s Governor Inslee. The award was the largest in the state as part of a wider Career Connect Washington initiative to increase career guidance, work-based opportunities, and apprenticeship pathways for youth and adults. The effort builds on career-connected learning best practices to scale partnerships between the public school system and local industry to serve all youth age 16-24, with a special emphasis on underrepresented populations. The program also connects unemployed adults with apprenticeship opportunities. Two school districts, three youth service providers, one dropout re-engagement center, the community college system, and apprenticeship organizations are a part of the effort to build a holistic system of support for career connected learning.  
Career Link, a reengagement program and partnership between Highline Public Schools and South Seattle College, has worked with Washington’s Open Doors dropout reengagement system to provide career mentorship for out-of-school youth. With the work of the project, the model will be scaled to form an intensive, three-part program encompassing career planning, adult mentoring, and career experience with local businesses. Seattle Colleges acts in 
partnership as a convener for an apprenticeship “Collaboratory,” developing standard processes for enrolling youth and ensuring their success in apprenticeships. Committed apprenticeship partners include businesses in the aerospace, culinary, allied health and construction sectors. The Collaboratory has promoted youth apprenticeship through employer tours, career days, open houses, working with parents, counselors and teacher externships. In addition, through providing technical assistance, the Collaboratory is working to expand apprenticeship into new sectors like insurance and banking, using regional economic data to inform apprenticeships, and drawing on expertise in pre-apprenticeship. They are developing toolkits that can be used by apprenticeships to work with both in and out-of-school youth.  
Within this first year, 3,553 total learning experiences have occurred, with 1,612 young people receiving a comprehensive career plan as well as 204 successfully completed internships. 

This is a small image of a map showing the areas served by the WorkForce Central Washington (Workforce Development Council) which serves all of Pierce County.

workforce-central.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/08/wfc_skillsgapanalysis_1121.pdf 

 

WorkForce Central 
WorkForce Central Washington  Serving Pierce County 
Business and Sector Engagement 
Pierce County Construction Career Day 
November 14, 2018 will be the 11th year of the Pierce County Career Day event. The construction industry is the fastest-growing sector in Pierce County. Construction is projected to grow by 3.6% annually according to the 2016 report commissioned by the Pierce County Workforce Development Council.1 Though construction-related career paths offer opportunities for growth at virtually every stage of training or education, employers face difficulties connecting with entry-level workers early in their careers. Pierce County Career Day was formed to introduce high school students to career opportunities in construction and the trades. 
Pierce County Career Day helps high school students learn about apprenticeships and occupations in the utility, construction, manufacturing, and transportation industries. More than 2,000 students from various high schools in seven Western Washington counties gather at the Washington State Fairgrounds to learn firsthand from the experts that high-wage occupations do not always require a four-year degree. 
 
1 “Skills Gap Analysis & Sector Strategies at a Glance.” Workforce-Central.org, Sept. 2016, 

Over 100 exhibitors, including local community and technical colleges and apprenticeship programs expose students to opportunities and information that will make them successful in these industries. 
Hands-on exhibits allow students to experience the versatility of trade occupations offered in a controlled, safe environment. 
Coordination is organized through the Pierce County Career Day Committee. The committee is comprised of educators, workforce development agencies and employers through the Pierce County Construction Partnership and WorkSource system partners. 
Sector Round Tables  
To better serve businesses within Pierce County, the Pierce County Business Solutions Team comprised of workforce system partners created sector-specific roundtables. The focus of the roundtable is to discuss industry trends, service delivery practices, candidate selection, labor market data and current workforce climate.  
Sector roundtables included sessions specific to individual sectors. The sectors focused on include healthcare, apprenticeship information, manufacturing, and transportation/warehouse logistics. The hosted roundtable events promote a collaborative nature for employers. Employers discuss similar challenges that they face and provide support to other representatives. During the transportation and warehouse logistics roundtable, Amazon was in attendance. Another employer expressed difficulty with failed drug screenings for onboarding applicants. Amazon assisted this company by sharing best practices for their drug screening model. 
Customized Suite of Services for Businesses 
The Pierce County Business Solutions Team assists employers with talent recruitment, training, rapid response and labor market information. The team tailors 

services to businesses of any size within the six in-demand sectors of Pierce County. The sectors consist of construction, transportation/warehouse logistics, healthcare, advanced manufacturing, military and defense and IT/cyber security. 
A robust partnership with the Economic Development Board (EDB) of Tacoma-Pierce County allows the team to address the business needs of new incoming companies. Business needs include, but are not limited to, recruitment services, candidate screening and hiring events. Over the past two years, in partnership with EDB, over 192 new businesses have been served. 
The low unemployment rate of 4.9%2 has brought unique challenges for local businesses throughout the region who need help attracting, retaining and training qualified employees. The Pierce County Business Solutions Team is currently planning a “Recruiting Resources during Times of Low Unemployment” forum for Pierce County employers in partnership with the EDB. A panel comprised of industry experts in the field of workforce development, staffing and business will discuss resources and best practices. The forum is currently set for early December and will help to address the needs and concerns of the employers around this topic. 
The Pierce County Business Solutions Team connects employers to talent who fit their hiring needs. Niche talent is found via the hosting of hiring events, job fairs and providing informational sessions to promote job readiness. The WorkSource Pierce Job Center allows use of the facility to employers for hiring events, interviews, job fairs, testing and training. 
2 “Monthly Employment Report.” Partnering in Pursuit of Greater Economic Vitality for All, WorkForce Central, 27 Sept. 2018, workforce-central.org/research-data/laborreport/ 
The space offers businesses amenities such as the use of computers, presentation technology, marketing materials, job skills, candidate-fit analysis and background checks. In December 2018, businesses will have access to a new state-of-the-art WorkSource Pierce Job Center. 
In program year 2018, the Pierce County Business Solutions Team launched “Employer of the Day.” Employer of the Day is an informal information session that is held weekly at the WorkSource Pierce Job Center for employers and customers. 
The events are set for each Thursday, following the general orientation for job seekers. Customers meet with the employer to discuss their skill sets. The employer is aware that this is not a hiring event, but rather an informational session for the employer to speak with participates, gauge interest and promote their business. 
Rapid Response 
The Pierce County Business Solutions Team continues to provide and increase awareness of rapid response services to employers throughout Pierce County. The Rapid Response Team is charged with ensuring that job seekers who will potentially be laid off are aware of the resources available to them and how to navigate the menu of services presented. Rapid response services are customized to reflect the employers’ needs regarding services and information. 
The Rapid Response Team includes system partners such as the Rapid Response Coordinator (ResCare), Career Path Services, U.S. Department of Labor, Employment Security Department, the Pierce County Library System, the Washington State Labor Council and the local community colleges. During program year 2017, the Rapid Response Team assisted 12 companies with rapid response services. 
Single Point-of-Contact Methodology for Business 
Over the past year, WorkForce Central has been convening with system partners to discuss the topic of a single point of contact for business. System partners recently began developing a methodology to streamline contact between businesses and system partners. Business customers will no longer have to speak to multiple providers. The aim is to connect local employers to workforce system services but with system coordination and data analytics. When system partners respond to businesses, they will use an electronic contact management system. This system will track communication with employers and remove duplication of contact.  
Providing a single point of contact to Pierce County employers will strengthen universal access to workforce development services such as talent development, retention services, assessments and skill gap analysis, assessment of job applicants, assistance in finding qualified workers, connections to industry partnerships, custom on-the-job training (OJT) development, custom incumbent worker training and subsidized OJT. Additional services include, but are not limited to, labor market research, recruitment and placement services. 
Seventeen memorandum of understanding (MOU) system partners have committed to operating under the following standards governing single point of contact for business: 
1. Response to an initial inquiry from a business customer must occur within one business day. 
2. Response to a request for services by a business customer must occur within two to three business days. 
Serving Youth and/or Barriered Populations 
Disconnected Young Adults Data and Strategies  
WorkForce Central on behalf of the Chief Elected Officials (CEO) and the WorkForce Development Council (WDC), is committed to reducing the number of Pierce County Disconnected Young Adults (DYA) age 16 to 24 by 50% (from 15,300 to 7,650) by 2025. The definition of disconnected young adult is an individual not connected to school or employment. Last year the WDC Strategic Planning Team chose DYA engagement as the initial component of focus for data collection and analytics. Pierce County system partners recognized the benefits of mobility by bringing our services to the customer. WorkForce Central and system partners are taking a grassroots approach to build relationships with community partners/leaders, community and faith-based organizations and minority-owned businesses that are not consistently represented at the workforce development table. One of the strategies going forward is to add co-locations to partner sites to increase accessibility throughout Pierce County. Critical to the success of the young adult “Bold Goal Initiative” is brokering contact at local “hang-outs” for disconnected young adults. Inclusion of young adult voices in strategic planning and implementation is critical for success in meeting the Bold Goal Initiative. 
The most problematic barriers identified by case managers were lack of high school diploma/GED, disabilities and offender status. In response to these and additional obstacles, WorkForce Central has conducted best practices research. Progress made leads us to consider adding certified life coaches to assist with high-barrier needs. New approaches will address behavioral and functioning deficits toward success. We anticipate this approach will result in an increased frequency of success when connecting young adults to system services 
and resources. We also utilize work-based learning and essential skills training called “Workplace Excellence” to improve employment and education retention outcomes. Pierce County providers work with young adult-friendly businesses that are committed to their success and to building a future pipeline of skilled workers. 
JobFest  
JobFest is the largest young adult job fair in the state of Washington. This event occurs in the spring and assists job seekers age 16-24 with obtaining full-time and part-time employment. JobFest celebrated its fifth year in 2018, and has been coordinated the last two years by Pierce County’s system partner, ResCare. More than 500 young adults attended last year’s JobFest, resulting in 171 interviews and 55 hires. 
Exhibitors broadly represent all sectors and industries seeking to fill a variety of positions. Community-based organizations and educational resource providers attended the event. In an effort to broaden resource exposure, JobFest included mental health, housing and other supportive services. 
Outreach included a billboard, Pierce Transit bus stops and Pandora Internet Radio. Through these avenues, we were able to market the event across Pierce County. The Pandora campaign delivered over 869,000 impressions to the target audience, over 1,300 clicks to the Eventbrite landing page, and reached over 47,000 unique visitors.  
The JobFest Committee was also able to partner with Commercial Driving School (CDC) for free transportation for young adults to and from the event. Different pick-up stations were spread out across different areas of Pierce County, with the focus being on rural areas and areas without local transportation. 
Serving Adults and Dislocated Workers  
WorkForce Central and system providers increased efforts to connect with individuals who lack a high school diploma or GED. The CEO and the WDC’s Bold Goal Initiative is to reduce the number of Pierce County residents age 25 to 64 without a high school diploma or GED by 50% (from 38,475 to 19,237) by 2025. Current efforts include collecting trend data on population demographics in underserved areas within the Pierce County region. The new initiative involves bringing the extensive WorkSource and system resources to the communities where these underserved populations reside. 
Integrated Services 
Common Referral System 
Development of a common customer referral system to be shared by system partners via United Way 211 is underway. This effort will allow customers to access multiple service options from a single connecting source (211). A customer in need of workforce system services will contact 211, at which point the common referral system will interface with a catalog of local service providers targeting the customer’s need. A referral to the appropriate service provider(s) will be generated. System partners have committed to provide information back to the referring agency on the status of the referral. 
This effort will reduce the customer’s need to navigate several service options independently. The responsibility will be centered on the system’s expectation to generate referrals and coordination of activities with other programs and services, including programs and services within the one-stop delivery system and other workforce development programs. The system-wide pilot rollout occurred second quarter 2018. 
 
Shared Data Platform for System  Performance Review 
In viewing how we perform as a partner network, data sharing has long been a point of difficulty and a large hurdle. WorkForce Central of Pierce County will use iDashboard as a data sharing mechanism for our MOU partners. We want to know how the system is performing based on common metrics decided upon by the CEO, Workforce Investment Board and the MOU partners. Partners will be given licenses to enter data metrics. All of these metrics will have drill-down points and all partners have agreed on the same definitions for the data elements. 
On behalf of the CEO and the WDC, WorkForce Central is in the process of developing a shared dashboard for system partners to use and track system progress via common metrics. iDashboard is a self-service dashboard software program that helps the user create engaging dashboards with custom charts and graphs. It helps to organize data that is user friendly and makes it easier to analyze. We can drill down to analyze gaps and strengths in our system. We will also be able to drill down the data to specific partners. For example, we can see how many customers were placed in a service by a particular partner and see populations served from various data points and locations. 
Customer Satisfaction – Review of System Performance from the Customers’ Perspective  
System partners have agreed to promote and use common customer satisfaction tools created to collect and analyze responses, which are being captured through comment cards, focus groups and random survey methods. 
 
 
System partners agree to use the data collected from the customer to improve service delivery methodologies and expand on the work customers report as successful and having a meaningful impact. 
System-integrated participation in this effort aims to collect data related to: 
. Performance outcomes  

. Business contacts  

. Measures deemed critical by the WDC 


WDC Work – Future Forward 
Live. Work. Pierce. Online Jobs Board  
In October, WorkForce Central launched Live. Work. Pierce., an online jobs board that displays all current job listings in Pierce County and is located on the WorkForce Central website. Updated daily, the tool scrapes results from every major online jobs board, and then filters them by geographical area. In the first week of its launch, nearly 2,000 users accessed the site.  
With roughly 10,000 job openings in Pierce County, the jobs board highlights the robust career opportunities available and is intended to help local employers find local talent. 
Increased Accessibility  
We are looking to partner with 22 Pierce County library sites to serve underserved and unserved areas of Pierce County. A large percentage of these sites are located in unincorporated parts of Pierce County. 
Intensive discussions by the Workforce Development Council’s (WDC) Strategic Planning Committee members and feedback from staff, partners, and stakeholders produced our strategic action plan for July 2018 through June 2021. This document lays the foundation for the organization’s business plan, which will outline key actions and resources required to execute the objectives and strategies planned to facilitate work with the two bold goal populations.  
The strategic direction, goals and strategies included in this plan are a response to what our customers value most about the workforce system. It also addresses current opportunities and challenges for offering a high-quality system of talent development to the area’s businesses. 
During the four-year period of this strategic plan, we will increase our leadership role in developing talent through data analytics; by working to remove racial, ethnic and geographic disparities in the county; and by being proactive in creating partnerships that can catalyze opportunities. We will actively engage with our communities to create opportunities for our customers to gain skills and resources required to become self-sufficient. 
We support our customers in gaining the skills and confidence to make the right choices for them and their families. The plan to strengthen connection with customers is to: 
. Strengthen workforce development strategies for adults that link education and career pathways to an increase in targeted sector employment opportunities to ensure that workers have the skills needed to fill current and emerging high-wage/high-demand jobs.  

. Strengthen workforce development strategies for young adults that ensure access to education and training opportunities, particularly for young adults facing barriers to employment. 


. Establish strong linkages with post-secondary institutions and local labor unions to align programming with career pathways and labor market demand.  

. Promote registered apprenticeship programs.  

. Build a highly efficient job placement infrastructure through alignment of local public and private services.  

. Customize the service delivery processes to meet the needs of disconnected young adults and adults without a high school diploma or GED.3 


WorkForce Central, representing the CEO and WDC, initiated certification standards based on the Malcolm Baldridge National Quality Award criteria. This reflects a commitment to strive for superior performance, continuous improvement and highly satisfied customers. The certification holds a promise that customers will get consistently high-quality services at any entity, traditional or nontraditional, that has the ability to provide a direct connection to our WorkSource system services. Nontraditional partners such as libraries, foodbanks and faith-based organizations are being leveraged as system access points over the next two years. The level of certification determines what services are available: 
. Full-service job centers: Co-located facilities where comprehensive job seeker (WIOA) services are offered. 

. Partner affiliate sites: Spaces where, at a minimum, basic career services are offered. 

. Connection satellite sites: Spaces where technology is available for job seekers to access online workforce development system resources. 


3 WDC Strategic Planning Team. 
Certification cycles are quarterly and include information sessions and training to inform Pierce County residents and community partners about the necessity for system expansion and access. This process requires all providers to create continuous quality improvement teams that are charged with improving processes throughout the organization. 
As a result of this process, we have certified the first affiliate site located at Joint Base Lewis-McChord (JBLM). The JBLM WorkSource Affiliate Site is the first ever American Job Center certified on a military base in the U.S. 

This is a small image of a map showing the areas served by WorkForce Southwest Washington which serves Clark, Cowlitz and Wahkiakum counties.

 

Southwest Washington 
Workforce Southwest Washington  Serving Clark, Cowlitz and Wahkiakum 
counties 
Business and Sector Engagement 
Workforce Southwest Washington (WSW) works as part of a bi-state collaborative effort with our workforce board partners in neighboring Oregon communities. Together we have formed the Columbia-Willamette Workforce Collaborative (CWWC) and it is our mission to align workforce supply with industry demand. We are committed to collaboration across program and jurisdictional boundaries to build employer partnerships and address the skill shortages facing the regional workforce. The CWWC focuses on our region’s most critical industries including healthcare, manufacturing, technology and construction. WSW’s business engagement team and funding for employer initiatives (on-the-job training, incumbent worker training and internships) is also in alignment with these sectors. 
In the summer of 2018, WSW implemented Launchpad – a cloud-based customer relationship management (CRM) tool developed specifically for workforce development and business engagement. This CRM is part of a larger strategy to continue to transform into a data-driven workforce system, improve accountability and drive performance. In addition, it will capture data on businesses served in order to help tell 

our story, and better understand (in real time) the challenges and opportunities that exist locally in workforce and economic development. It will also house vetted candidates for fast and efficient job matching and referral. In a tight labor market, more and more businesses are investing in training for their current employees to create pathways to fill the most challenging positions at the mid-upper level. WSW has developed a robust incumbent worker training strategy, invested minimally, and influenced maximally. With $225K invested in a two-year period, more than 500 workers have been trained to fill roles in management and leadership, gained industry-recognized credentials in technology, manufacturing and healthcare, and earned pay increases and career advancement opportunities. Participating private sector businesses contributed over $380K in training costs and employee wages.   
An image of an event called Manufacturing Day where manufacturers dispelled myths and shared information about career opportunities to young people.
An image of two female students testing their skills on construction equipment during the Youth Employment Summit. One of the girls is on a backhoe.

the study found a jump to 7,178. Commonly referred to as opportunity youth, this number now represents 14% of all people in this age group. Clark County faces staggering economic costs if future prospects for these youth remain unchanged. The multi-pronged challenges of serving this population in an equitable way spurred the development of a one-stop education and career hub for Clark County — Next. 
Students test their skills on construction equipment during the Youth Employment Summit 
Youth 
Opportunity Youth: What’s Next?  
Making the transition from traditional education to either the workforce or an alternative education pathway presents great opportunities and challenges for strengthening our local workforce and community. Many young adults are not fully prepared to make a seamless transition into the workforce and are struggling to identify their next steps. These individuals represent an important focus and priority for local workforce development efforts.  
In 2016 and then again in 2018, WSW commissioned a study regarding young adults ages 16-24 to determine the education and employment needs of this group. In 2016, the study identified 6,045 young adults in Clark County who were not working and not in school. In 2018, 

In partnership with more than 20 private and public community stakeholders, Next officially opened its doors August 27, 2018.  Next is the only resource in Clark County that allows for the depth of career-related learning, employment training and preparation, as well as access to a multitude of co-located partners and employers. By providing the holistic support and training that young adults aged 16-24 need to get set for success, those that walk through Next’s doors will be able to create the future they want — all in one place. All the partners who are co-located and operating out of Next believe that when young people receive the integrated support, training and resources that they need to complete their education and find a job, they’re ready to kick open opportunity’s door and create the future they want. Current partners co-located at Next are Clark College, Job Corps, Columbia River Mental Health, Educational Service District 112, WorkSource, Department of Vocational Rehab, and Partners in Careers. These partners provide leadership oversight of Next, as well as the necessary staffing. Currently, Next allows for community partners and employers to align and integrate to offer the following four buckets of services for Opportunity Youth in Clark County:  1. Academic Development: The curriculum and instructional practices that support students to master high school diploma/general equivalency standards and prepare for future education. This piece of programming is provided by Clark College and Educational Service District 112.   2. Career Preparation: Services that provide career exposure, paid work experience with local high growth and in-demand employers, job-readiness training and job placement support. This piece of programming is provided by WorkSource, 
ResCare, Partners in Careers, Department of Vocational Rehabilitation and Job Corps.  


3. Post-Secondary Transitions: Supports that prepare young adults for post-secondary learning environments, support them in applying and enrolling, and help them obtain a degree or certificate. This piece of programming is provided by Clark College and Washington State University Vancouver. 


4. Wrap-Around Supports. Next partners define this as an array of services that help students address basic needs and achieve a level of social and emotional well-being that makes learning possible. There is food available and shower access for each young adult who walks into the doors of Next. In addition, there is the provision of mental health services on site to allow for true trauma-informed care, and support for young adults needing further stability to move forward with their career and education goals. 


This is a small image of a map showing the areas served by North Central Workforce development council which serves Adams, Chelan, Douglas, Grant and Okanogan counties.

North Central 
Workforce Development Council  Serving Adams, Chelan, Douglas, Grant, and Okanogan counties 
Career Connect Washington 
As part of the Career Connect Washington initiative, North Central collaborated with several organizations to expand registered apprenticeship opportunities throughout our five-county area. Initial engagement between Family Health Centers in Okanogan County and the job training unit at WorkSource Okanogan led to an agreement to sponsor dental assistant apprentices through the training program offered by the Washington State Association for Community and Migrant Health Centers (WACMHC). WIOA Title I staff and WACMHC administrators jointly approached health centers and dental clinics in Chelan, Douglas, Grant, Adams and Okanogan counties to become participating employers in the apprenticeship program. Joint communication was shared with thirteen community and migrant health centers and dental clinics in the five counties.  
WACMHC’s dental assistant registered apprenticeship structures an on-the-job training component with the employer and also conducts 420 hours of required supplemental instruction, including 56 hours of hands-on practical experience. Career Connect Fund C would provide tuition and training costs for up to 12 apprentices over a 21-month period. The value of the program is well understood by the participating health centers. Miryam Nossa, 

Columbia Valley Community Health Center’s dental manager, explained the benefits of the combined on-the-job and classroom training: “As an apprentice, students learn clinic Dental Assisting skills; more importantly, they learn to care for the community.”  Kimberly Alejandrez, Career Connect Washington dental assistant apprentice. To date, the WACMHC dental assistant registered apprenticeship has been the most successful apprenticeship initiative in North Central’s Career Connect Washington portfolio, with four employers signed on as approved training agents in Chelan and Okanogan counties, and seven of the 12 Career Connect positions identified and filled. Career Connect Washington’s impact on local healthcare training options directly led to the formation of an Okanogan County collaborative workforce training group consisting of hospital and healthcare administrators, local education partners including K-12 and the local community college, and workforce development agencies. The stated goal is to better connect potential employees to the full range of career opportunities within regional healthcare providers, and provide awareness of the full range of training available to employers, employees and staff.  North Central’s partnership with WACMHC is expected to continue on past the completion of the Career Connect project as a model career pathway for adults, dislocated workers and/or incumbent workers to explore and pursue.  
A photo of a young woman named Kimberly Alejandrez who went through the Career Connect Washington Dental Asisstant Apprenticeship program.
This is a small image of a map showing the areas served by South Central Workforce Development Council which serves Kittitas, Klickitat, Skamania and Yakima counties.

South Central 
Workforce Development Council  Serving Kittitas, Klickitat, Skamania and  Yakima counties 
 
Upskill/Backfill Initiative 
The South Central Workforce Development Council (SCWDC) has partnered with Clark College, Klickitat County Economic Development, and a consortium of aerospace manufacturing companies as the leadership group for this Upskill-Backfill Initiative. Trainings offered during the performance period include project management (24 hours), blueprint reading (32 hours), certification in production and inventory management (24 hours), your role as a supervisor (4 hours) and basic electronics (36 hours). 
The initiative aims for sustainability by enhancing the relationships between local companies, workforce councils, higher education, local school districts and the local economic development agency. By using this initiative, these companies will have an established relationship with SCWDC and local educational entities. The greatest advantage is the partnerships it has created. It is designed for long-term growth for a multitude of entities, while also being flexible enough to meet changing demands. 
The initiative has achieved higher than planned completions for upskill trainings as well as backfill positions filled. Additionally, the leadership group has done an effective job at ensuring there is a fluid, dynamic class schedule that responds to real-time/adapting industry and workforce needs. This ensures that, as the initiative moves forward, any 

changing priorities for the participating companies are met with a change in what direction/topics the trainings cover. This allows our initiative to adapt to the ever-changing needs of this highly dynamic manufacturing sector. These are great opportunities to increase awareness of workforce development within the business community, giving us greater opportunity for further industry trainings in the area. Due to such a high number of incumbent workers put through upskill trainings, the businesses have been able to expand at a much faster rate than they would without these trainings, and have hired a much higher number of backfill workers than originally planned due to the success of the initiative. Career Connected Learning The South Central Career Connect (SCCC) initiative is intended to create a long-term cultural change that values family-wage STEM careers and career pathways through work-based learning opportunities, internships, registered apprenticeships and additional high quality career-connected learning experiences. The direct impact of the initiative will be an increase in the number of youth possessing the necessary basic education and foundational job-specific skills needed to move seamlessly into further training or directly into high-demand jobs. The region covers approximately 10,119 square miles and is comprised of Kittitas, Klickitat, Skamania and Yakima counties. Unlike metropolitan areas of the state, the South Central Region is challenged by a vast geographic area with many small rural communities. While major universities, community colleges and technical schools are available to metropolitan areas, youth in rural communities of Yakima and Kittitas counties, as well as those residing in Klickitat and Skamania counties are challenged by the lack of availability and access to skilled training opportunities. While Yakima County has developed a strong STEM network, it continues to be 
difficult for youth in the more remote and rural communities of the area to access available STEM programs and career-connected learning opportunities. 
Historically, the major proportion of new entrants into the labor force falls in the 16 to 24-year age bracket. The 2014-2015 OSPI report card, which reflects the number of students failing to graduate, indicates the school districts within the workforce area continue to experience a significantly high dropout rate predominantly in the smaller rural communities of the region. Regarding poverty, all counties in the local area exceed the Washington state percentage for individuals living below the federal poverty level. It is these youth and their families that the SCCC will prioritize for services. 
To address the demographic and rural issues for youth in the region, the SCCC initiative has incorporated a broad set of proven practices in new services that will provide young people opportunities to pursue high-wage STEM careers. The strategies have included: 
. Both expanded and new apprenticeship tracks for youth. 

. Increasing exposure to high-need STEM occupations. 

. Boot Camp pre-apprenticeship with the Northwest Carpenters Institute. 

. Incorporation of 2Gen activities for high poverty youth with DSHS. 

. Partnership between the South Central STEM Network and the South Central WDC to serve the youth in all four counties. 


 
Maximizing Business Engagement 
In October 2018, the SCWDC engaged the services of BusinessU, Inc. to conduct three sessions of business engagement boot camp. Over the three-day boot camp, about 100 people attended. Those in attendance represented partners of the South Central workforce system to include representatives of all four titles of WIOA, economic development, and local chambers. Also in attendance were representatives from neighboring workforce development regions and Washington State Employment Security Department Human Resources. 
The focus behind the boot camp was to introduce concepts and tools to move employer engagement away from the selling of participants and services to building a consulting relationship with businesses. Boot camp taught attendees how to have the conversations with employers to determine what their business needs are and then choreograph the workforce and community resources to present a comprehensive solution to the employer. 
The local workforce system has historically used a supply side selling approach to engaging with employers. Marketing a trained workforce and programs in silos of individual agency programs. This transactional approach to working with businesses may not help an employer resolve the concerns that are keeping them up at night. The transitional approach builds the relationship with the employer that will allow the workforce system and community to understand that employer’s specific needs and apply the appropriate resources that will help that employer succeed and expand within a community. 

This is a small image of a map showing the areas served by the Eastern Washington Partnership which serves Asotin, Columbia, Ferry, Garfield, Lincoln, Pend Orielle, Stevens, Walla Walla and Whitman counties.

 

Eastern Washington 
Eastern Washington Partnership  Serving Asotin, Columbia, Ferry, Garfield, Lincoln, Pend Orielle, Stevens, Walla Walla and Whitman counties 
Highlights for Program Year 2017 
There was a significant decline in job opportunities within the Eastern Washington area during the recent recession. The nine counties have come through the Great Recession, and the economy is improving although some counties were hit by major closures resulting in a slower comeback than others. In examining and exploring economic conditions in the Eastern Washington Partnership, three sectors rise to prominence in all nine counties. Healthcare, warehousing and transportation and manufacturing are the sectors that present a persistent need for trained workers. 
With multiple hospitals, numerous clinics, nursing home facilities and the need for home healthcare, a wide spectrum of workers are needed in the healthcare sector. At the entry level, nurse aides and medical assistants are in demand in rural facilities. Training for these can be provided by local agencies or community colleges. The next rung up the career ladder, and very much in demand, are registered nurses.  
Manufacturing of all types takes place within the area, including boats, stoves, food products, lumber and mining. A variety of occupations related to and supportive of this sector require workers to 

learn new skills that involve technology. Precision machining, specialty diesel technology, metal fabrication, production equipment maintenance and repair are among the emerging occupations in this field. Wind energy technology continues to require technicians who can apply advanced skills to the jobs that are opening up in this emerging segment of the manufacturing cluster. Here are some highlights of efforts to meet the workforce needs of the region during the last year. Business and Sector Engagement The Eastern Washington Partnership (EWP) Workforce Development Council has an area that includes nine rural counties covering over 14,000 square miles. Delivering business engagement services from one central location does not make sense. Three business engagement teams were developed using partner staff from each sub-region of the area. Teams were established in Walla Walla, Colville and Clarkston, each serving a multi-county area. Members represent the active system partnership in each sub-region and represent staff from economic development councils, community colleges, Employment Security, community-based organizations, Division of Vocational Rehabilitation, and others working together to identify local workforce issues. EWP and service-provider staff have participated in local and regional skills panels for manufacturing, forest products and health occupations. Participating on the skills panels allows staff to hear from employers of all sizes explain the challenges and successes they have experienced with the local workforce. Employers get an opportunity to share with each other and hear from peers regarding innovative ways to address workforce needs. Walla Walla WorkSource is in the process of reinvigorating their one-stop business services committee made up of local employers, Walla Walla Community College, economic development and workforce 
development members. The purpose of the committee is to function as an advisory group to provide input regarding the needs of the business community and the relevance, value and effectiveness of the business services delivered at the one-stop center. 
Work-based Learning 
The EWP and Spokane STEM collaborated with the Stevens County Conservation District on a Career Connected Learning project. The goal of the project is to provide youth an opportunity to experience a career in forestry, give them a chance to re-imagine and set goals for their futures, and alleviate barriers to living-wage employment for youth in the region. Paid forestry internships are being offered to youth throughout Ferry, Pend Oreille and Stevens counties. Educational programming is also provided to support the worksite learning and introduce youth to forestry curriculum content through hands-on investigations and learning on the ground. 
Oversight of the project is conducted by The Eastern Washington Career Connect Team with representation from the EWP, Spokane STEM, Stevens County Conservation District, Colville National Forest, Boise Cascade, Rural Resources Employment and Training, Colville School District and Spokane Community College. Internship worksites include Little Pend Oreille National Wildlife Refuge, Stevens County Noxious Weed Control Board, Columbia Cedar, Boise Cascade and Colville National Forest.  

This is an image of youth who participated in the Career Connected Learning Program where Phil Bradeen with Vaagens Lumber shows them how they use drones for timber management.  He shared with the students the variety of careers possible at Vaagens Lumber Company.
 
The youth in the photo above participated in the Career Connected Learning program and are being shown how Phil Bradeen with Vaagens Lumber, is using drones for timber management. Phil was very knowledgeable in sharing the variety of careers possible at Vaagens Lumber.  
Serving Youth 
Eastern Washington’s commitment to provide youth with opportunities to gain the skills necessary to advance along a career pathway have led to the development of a variety of innovative services. Blue Mt. Action Council (BMAC), which is a WIOA youth program service provider, and Rural Resources Community Action (RR), another WIOA youth program service provider, in partnership with the Division of Vocational Rehabilitation (DVR) provide pre-employment transition services to disabled youth transitioning from the secondary education system. The project offers a combination of pre-employment training, work experience placements and career readiness training in an effort to prepare youth for the next steps on a career pathway. 
The Three Rivers Youth Conservation Corps project is a partnership between the Colville National Forest and Rural Resources Community Action, a WIOA Youth provider. This project began in 2017 and provided funding, supervision and relevant work experience for four local high school students, focusing on the training and exposure of these youth to a variety of aspects pertaining to land 
and resource management on the national forest. The crew participated in work that included fisheries and aquatics monitoring, soil condition surveys, recreation enhancement, rangeland improvement and monitoring, and timber sale preparation and layout. The project was replicated in 2018 for four more students with plans to continue and possibly expand into a second Ranger District in 2019.  
The funding associated with this project paid the salary of the students (240 hours), and helped with expenditures associated with payroll and hiring activities. Along with on-the-ground experience gained through actual project work and accomplishment, Rural Resources and the Forest Service conducted a short workshop to help the students with valuable workplace skills including resume writing, application skills, and general workplace conduct. Funding for the project is a combination of Secure Rural Schools Title II and WIOA Title I Youth funds.  

This is a small image of a map showing the areas served by the Benton-Franklin Workforce Development Council which serves Benton and Franklin counties.

 

Benton-Franklin 
Workforce Development Council  Serving Benton and Franklin counties 
Benton-Franklin Seats a New CEO 
The Benton Franklin Workforce Development Council (BFWDC) seated a permanent Chief Executive Officer (CEO) in winter of PY17 following a resignation in fall of PY17. With her tenure came a “new day” leadership approach. One significant change was the organizational restructuring of key talent promoting experienced team members to management roles. In addition, a business manager was added, and the previous fiscal manager re-hired. The BFWDC is excited to climb new heights as they proceed to uncover local, state and national opportunities. 
Prioritized Goals 
The BFWDC prioritized the following goals for Workforce Development Area (WDA) 11 and has made great strides in achieving them. 1) Explore opportunities to expand revenue. 2) Ensure all youth receive education, training and the support they need for success in postsecondary education and or work. 3) Provide adults with access to lifelong education, training and employment services. 4) Meet the workforce needs of employers by providing needed support and preparing youth, incumbent workers and dislocated workers with a skills pathway approach. 

A photo showing a classroom of adults getting access to lifelong education, training and employment services.

 

Providing adults with access to lifelong education, training and employment services. 
  
The BFWDC selected the Benton Franklin Workforce Consortium (BFWC) to be the WorkSource One Stop Operator (OSO) in late summer of 2017. The BFWC consists of the following members: Career Path Services, Columbia Basin College, Employment Security Department and Division of Vocational Rehabilitation. The BFWC provides OSO services through WorkSource Columbia Basin (WSCB), the only comprehensive American Job Center in Benton and Franklin counties. Members of the BFWC have committed to a shared governance approach, which includes an equal voice and equal participation. The BFWDC is pleased to have a consortium of professionals representing titles I, II, III and IV of WIOA working collaboratively to implement innovative ideas while still maintaining a culture of delivering quality services to the customer. 

Employer Relations 
Significant work has been done regarding employer relations during the reporting cycle. The BFWDC is committed to having a more robust social media footprint.  
The return on investment for this outreach endeavor is that WSCB is number one in the state in terms of Facebook page likes and engagement. In addition, two new quarterly offerings are engaging the business community at a higher level. 
Business Banter is a roundtable where members of the WSCB business services team discuss the resources available to employers through WorkSource that make hiring, training and retaining employees easier, faster and better.  

An image of the Business Banter Flyer used for the roundtable event where members of the WSCB business services team discussed resources available to employers through WorkSource.
 
The Fast Track to Jobs is a partnership with WSCB and Columbia Basin College to help local employers fill their open positions through short-term training. The short-term training programs are created to fill the skill gap in a way that gets job seekers to work faster. Recent industries identified as facing a skilled aging workforce that will soon retire and that are 
simultaneously not seeking these skills in new job seekers are: certified production technician, certified logistics technician, commercial driver license and hospitality certification. By convening events such as these, BFWDC is part of a solution-driven approach to workforce development. The BFWDC, as the convener of WIOA, has strategically developed working relationships with the top 15 employers in Benton and Franklin counties representing in-demand industries. The sector areas are research and development, healthcare, education, food processing, environmental remediation, and construction. With the fastest growing job market in Washington state in 2017, it is important that the BFWDC maintain a pulse on the market to connect supply with demand. The BFWDC is a champion of Integrated Service Delivery (ISD). The local philosophy is that both job seekers and employers benefit when services are seamless. To date, functional supervision has been implemented at the basic level. As the BFWDC continues to grow WSCB in this space, the progress will be communicated to system stakeholders. In looking ahead, once WSCB team members are trained and the timing appropriate, the BFWDC will implement ISD with co-enrollment at WSCB.  The short-term training programs are created to fill the skill gap in a way that gets job seekers to work faster.
A photo of people attending an event to show short-term training programs that were created to fill the skill gaps in a way that gets job seekers to work faster.
This is a small image of a map showing the area served by the Spokane Workforce Development Council which serves all of Spokane County.

https://wdcspokane.com/workforce-reports 
Business Engagement Team CRM  and Coordinated Outreach 
The Business Engagement Team (BET) at WorkSource Spokane has deployed ezIQ, a customer relationship management (CRM) tool, into their everyday business services operations. This has supported a more coordinated effort in managing relationships with the business customers of WorkSource and reduced duplication of efforts. The CRM tool has mobile capabilities, which allow BET members to log activities and notes from the field when meeting with employers and at events.  

Spokane 
Workforce Development Council  Serving Spokane County 
Business and Sector Engagement 
The Spokane Workforce Council (SWC) has developed and implemented multiple strategies to strengthen business engagement in Spokane County. 
In-demand Occupation-specific Cohort  Training Model 
The Spokane Workforce Council implemented a cohort training model for WorkSource customers to obtain an occupation-specific certification in an in-demand occupation in Spokane County. Certifications are determined in a data-driven process, which includes reviewing online job postings data to determine workplace certifications that are requested by businesses in area job postings. All occupations considered for the cohort training model must also be classified as in-demand on the Occupations in Demand list for Spokane County. Through a competitive procurement process, the Spokane Workforce Council puts the training and testing of specific workplace certifications out to bid for eligible training providers to submit training proposals, which are vetted by the business-led SWC board. WorkSource Spokane recruits customers to take part in the training, and develops a hiring event for local businesses to meet and interact with graduates of the training cohorts after successful training and testing. 
 

The Business Engagement Team (BET) at WorkSource Spokane plans and coordinates the hiring event and invites local businesses who have posted for jobs asking for the certification that cohort graduates have just obtained. This model is designed to help fill immediate workforce needs for businesses and put WorkSource customers back to work as quickly as possible in an in-demand occupation. Over the past year, more than 193 businesses and 2,460 job seekers have participated in over 70 regional hiring events. 
Manufacturing and Information Technology  Focus Groups and Workforce Roadmaps 
The Spokane Workforce Council engaged area manufacturing and IT firms in focus groups to develop updated workforce roadmap reports for the two industries. Businesses in both industries are facing workforce challenges and labor shortages in meeting their hiring demands. The Spokane Workforce Council has listed manufacturing and professional, scientific, and technical services, along with three others, as targeted industries and focuses a majority of workforce development efforts on these industries that pay higher than average wages for the region and have a growing number of projected job openings in Spokane County. The published workforce roadmaps can be found at: 

The BET is expanding the number of business customers served by WorkSource Spokane and strengthening business relationships to create further brand awareness for WorkSource Spokane among the business community. 
Serving Youth and/or Barriered Populations 
TANF and WIOA Collaboration in Spokane 
Spokane provides a variety of Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF) and WIOA services in different locations. TANF customers who are ready to begin working are referred to WorkSource Spokane to access the array of career services and connect them to employment opportunities. Though the services for customers are funded under different programs, staff at WorkSource Spokane are grouped in a different way – by function – and there are two frontline teams who provide services under multiple TANF- and WIOA- funded programs offered at the WorkSource Center:  
Home Team: This team provides basic services to all customers at WorkSource, including greeting customers when they enter WorkSource, explaining all WorkSource services, signing customers up on worksourcewa.com (which effectively enrolls them in WIOA Title III), and helping customers with basic job search options, such as applying for jobs, updating resumes, and writing cover letters. The services this team provides come from WIOA Titles I and III and TANF funds (if the customer is a TANF customer), along with funds from over 20 other funding streams. 
Continuous Engagement Team (CET): This team provides more basic, individualized and training services to customers, including career coaching (case management).  
The services this team provides come primarily from both WIOA Title I and TANF funds (if the customer is a TANF customer), with additional blended funds from other sources. 
In addition, a third team works behind the scenes to manage the funding necessary to deliver the services and allows the career coaches to spend their time focusing on meeting their customers’ needs. 
Spokane’s seamless integration of funds makes the TANF and WIOA programs almost completely integrated, as the same staff are funded by both programs. The result is that these shared customers receive the full range of quality career services from expert staff throughout WorkSource Spokane, including benefiting from job search resources and workshops, access to business services and labor market intelligence, and improved employment outcomes. 
Integrated Services 
Integrated Service Delivery 
In 2017-2018, the Spokane WDC and WorkSource partners officially reopened as a fully integrated site using customer-center design principles, including feedback from our local Barriers and Access Committee. 
Components of the design include co-enrollment, functional teams, braided funding, highly trained staff, and engaged business partners. Integrated Service Delivery (ISD) is the delivery of WorkSource services in a manner that align/braids resources of participating partners to seamlessly address the training and employment needs of system customers (businesses and job seekers). Co-enrollment is the “glue” that allows ISD to work for all customers. It helps staff better braid resources, organize into functional teams, jointly serve business and job seeker customers, and accurately report the services being offered. 
Moving from program service delivery to integrated service delivery has increased customer satisfaction, increased numbers served, improved staff morale and job quality, enhanced business services, and increased our access to private funding. Through this model, WIOA Tile I Adult and Title III Wagner-Peyser will enroll and serve approximately 6,000-8,000 customers in 2018-2019 (non-duplicated).. .  
Appendix 2: Statewide Performance Reports 
Table Narrative 
The following data tables make up the final portion of Washington’s WIOA Title I and Title III Annual Report. A few notes may help with interpretation. Federal deadlines and the need for prompt reporting mean that the year-long periods used for some measures are not the same year-long periods used for others. Finally, since these are outcome measures, they concentrate on participants who have left WIOA programs and do not include those who are still participating.  
Federal employment rates second quarter after exit and median earnings measures are calculated for participants who exited between July 2016 and June 2017. Federal employment rates four quarters after exit are calculated for participants who exited between July 2016 and December 2016. Wage data is currently not available to completely report a year’s worth of performance for the employment rates four quarters after exit.  
Federal youth employment, education and training rates second quarter after exit and median earnings measures are calculated for participants who exited between July 2016 and June 2017. Federal youth employment, education and training rates fourth quarter after exit are calculated for participants who exited between July 2016 and December 2016. Wage data is currently not available to completely report a year’s worth of performance for the employment rates four quarters after exit. 
Not all individuals who exited are included in performance measures for a variety of reasons. For example, a member of a reserve military unit was called to active duty and so prematurely exited from the WorkSource system.  
The WIOA performance measures are different from the WIA performance measures. For PY17, the applicable WIOA performance measures are two employment rates and a median earnings rate. Employment measures are calculated for the second and fourth quarters after exit and include all exited participants, regardless if they were employed or not at registration. The earnings measure under WIOA is median earnings of those employed in the second quarter after exit. 
  
WIOA Adult 
OMB Control Number 1205-0526  ETA-9169 
Expiration Date:  06-30-2019 
Statewide Performance Report Certified in WIPS: 9/27/2018 4:05 PM EDT 
 
PROGRAM  WIOA Adult 
 TITLE (select one): 
 
STATE:  Washington Title I Local Area: 
REPORTING PERIOD COVERED (Required for current and three preceding years.) 
From ( mm/dd/yyyy  ):  7/1/2017 To ( mm/dd/yyyy  ):  6/30/2018 
 Title I Adult 
Title I Dislocated Worker 
Title I Youth 
Title I and Title III combined 
 . 
..
..
..
 Title II Adult Education 
Title III Wagner-Peyser 
Title IV Vocational Rehabilitation 
 ..
..
..
 

SUMMARY INFORMATION 
 
 
 
Service 
 Participants Served 
Cohort Period: 
 Participants Exited 
Cohort Period: 
4/1/2017-3/31/2018 
 Funds Expended 
Cohort Period: 
7/1/2017-6/30/2018 
 Cost Per Participant Served 
Cohort Period: 
7/1/2017-6/30/2018 
 
Career Services 
 23,192 
 20,086 
 $9,841,389 
 $424 
 
Training Services 
 1,883 
 858 
 $3,690,045 
 $1,960 
 
Percent training-related employment1: 
 Percent enrolled in more than one core program: 
 Percent admin expended: 
 
10.8% 
 100.0% 
 66.3% 
 

BY PARTICIPANT CHARACTERISTICS 
 
 
 Total Participants 
Served 
Cohort Period: 
7/1/2017-6/30/2018 
 Total Participants 
Exited 
Cohort Period: 
4/1/2017-3/31/2018 
  
 Employment Rate 
(Q2)2 
Cohort Period: 
7/1/2016-6/30/2017 
 Employment Rate 
(Q4)2 
Cohort Period: 
7/1/2016-12/31/2016 
 Median Earnings 
Cohort Period: 
7/1/2016-6/30/2017 
 Credential Rate3 
Cohort Period: 
7/1/2016-12/31/2016 
 Measurable Skill 
Gains3 
Cohort Period: 
7/1/2017-6/30/2018 
 
Num 
 Rate 
 Num 
 Rate 
 Earnings 
 Num 
 Rate 
 Num 
 Rate 
 
Total Statewide 
  
25,075 
  
20,944 
 Negotiated 
Targets 
  
 76.0% 
  
 73.5% 
 $6,209 
  
 60.0% 
  
 Baseline 
 
Actual 
 5,300 
 69.6% 
 857 
 72.6% 
 $7,859 
 181 
 77.7% 
 0 
  
 
      Sex 
  
Female 
 11,957 
 9,547 
  
 2,438 
 69.8% 
 444 
 72.5% 
 $6,821 
 93 
 72.7% 
 0 
  
 
 
Male 
 12,521 
 10,885 
  
 2,749 
 69.5% 
 398 
 72.9% 
 $8,905 
 83 
 83.0% 
 0 
  
 
Age 
  
< 16 
 0 
 0 
  
 0 
  
 0 
  
  
 0 
  
 0 
  
 
 
16 - 18 
 95 
 58 
  
 24 
 80.0% 
 8 
 80.0% 
 $4,858 
 2 
 66.7% 
 0 
  
 
 
19 - 24 
 1,479 
 1,137 
  
 456 
 78.6% 
 129 
 81.1% 
 $5,612 
 36 
 78.3% 
 0 
  
 
 
25 - 44 
 11,165 
 9,210 
  
 2,554 
 72.5% 
 481 
 75.3% 
 $7,783 
 110 
 80.9% 
 0 
  
 
 
45 - 54 
 5,991 
 5,160 
  
 1,251 
 70.2% 
 148 
 67.9% 
 $9,024 
 24 
 75.0% 
 0 
  
 
 
55 - 59 
 3,066 
 2,616 
  
 586 
 66.7% 
 56 
 66.7% 
 $8,599 
 4 
 80.0% 
 0 
  
 
 
60+ 
 3,279 
 2,763 
  
 429 
 52.2% 
 35 
 50.0% 
 $7,543 
 5 
 45.5% 
 0 
  
 
Ethnicity/Race 
  
American Indian / Alaska Native 
 693 
 558 
  
 135 
 67.5% 
 30 
 81.1% 
 $7,016 
 5 
 71.4% 
 0 
  
 
 
Asian 
 2,617 
 2,305 
  
 607 
 69.5% 
 96 
 79.3% 
 $8,652 
 12 
 85.7% 
 0 
  
 
 
Black / African American 
 2,095 
 1,735 
  
 561 
 73.3% 
 102 
 72.9% 
 $6,716 
 15 
 55.6% 
 0 
  
 
 
Hispanic / Latino 
 1,621 
 1,272 
  
 436 
 76.1% 
 100 
 76.9% 
 $6,193 
 27 
 84.4% 
 0 
  
 
 
Native Hawaiian / Pacific Islander 
 507 
 398 
  
 126 
 75.0% 
 22 
 84.6% 
 $8,029 
 4 
 100.0% 
 0 
  
 
 
White 
 16,787 
 13,861 
  
 3,345 
 68.7% 
 557 
 71.6% 
 $8,012 
 130 
 80.2% 
 0 
  
 
 
More Than One Race 
 734 
 582 
  
 168 
 74.3% 
 45 
 86.5% 
 $7,891 
 8 
 72.7% 
 0 
  
 

BY EMPLOYMENT BARRIER4 
 
 
 Total Participants 
Served 
 
 Total Participants 
Exited 
 
  
 Employment Rate 
(Q2)2 
 Employment Rate 
(Q4)2 
 Median Earnings 
 
 Credential Rate3 
 Measurable Skill 
Gains3 
 
Num 
 Rate 
 Num 
 Rate 
 Earnings 
 Num 
 Rate 
 Num 
 Rate 
 
Total Statewide 
  
25,075 
  
20,944 
 Negotiated 
Targets 
  
 76.0% 
  
 73.5% 
 $6,209 
  
 60.0% 
  
 Baseline 
 
Actual 
 5,300 
 69.6% 
 857 
 72.6% 
 $7,859 
 181 
 77.7% 
 0 
  
 
 
Displaced Homemakers 
 30 
 45 
  
 26 
 76.5% 
 0 
  
 $4,511 
 0 
  
 0 
  
 
English Language Learners, Low Levels of 
Literacy, Cultural Barriers 
 2,143 
 1,607 
  
 486 
 71.9% 
 95 
 72.5% 
 $6,651 
 14 
 73.7% 
 0 
  
 
Exhausting TANF within 2 years (Part A  
Title IV of the Social Security Act) 
 0 
 0 
  
 0 
  
 0 
  
  
 0 
  
 0 
  
 
 
Ex-offenders 
 1,507 
 1,069 
  
 319 
 65.2% 
 63 
 62.4% 
 $5,593 
 8 
 88.9% 
 0 
  
 
 
Homeless Individuals / runaway youth 
 1,073 
 794 
  
 220 
 63.4% 
 55 
 61.8% 
 $5,393 
 9 
 69.2% 
 0 
  
 
Long-term Unemployed  (27 or more consecutive weeks) 
 75 
 21 
  
 2 
 40.0% 
 1 
 100.0% 
 $15,509 
 0 
  
 0 
  
 
 
Low-Income Individuals 
 4,294 
 2,971 
  
 853 
 69.9% 
 168 
 69.1% 
 $5,983 
 22 
 81.5% 
 0 
  
 
 
Migrant and Seasonal Farmworkers 
 92 
 87 
  
 50 
 80.6% 
 12 
 75.0% 
 $8,542 
 7 
 87.5% 
 0 
  
 
 
Individuals with Disabilities (incl. youth) 
 1,791 
 1,296 
  
 290 
 54.4% 
 76 
 59.4% 
 $5,984 
 18 
 72.0% 
 0 
  
 
Single Parents (Incl. single pregnant  women) 
 894 
 574 
  
 203 
 72.5% 
 45 
 83.3% 
 $5,913 
 6 
 75.0% 
 0 
  
 
 
Youth in foster care or aged out of system 
 2 
 0 
  
 0 
  
 0 
  
  
 0 
  
 0 
  
 

ADDITIONAL COMMENTS: 
 
The state of Washington had to remove 127 records from the Full PIRL schema, which this report is based on, due to a variety of edit-check errors that couldn’t be resolved for submission. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1Applies to Title I only. 
2This indicator also includes those who entered into a training or education program for the Youth program. 
3Credential Rate and Measurable Skill Gains do not apply to the Wagner-Peyser program. 
4Barriers to Employment are determined at the point of entry into the program. 
Numbers entered into cells in this template are the same as the corresponding "report item number" on the report specification document. Clicking on each hyperlink will take the user to the plain text language 
 
Public Burden Statement (1205-0NEW) 
Persons are not required to respond to this collection of information unless it displays a currently valid OMB control number. Respondent’s reply to these reporting requirements is mandatory (Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act, Section 116). Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 30 minutes per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate to the Office of Policy Development and Research . U.S. Department of Labor . Room N-5641 . 200 Constitution Ave., NW, . Washington, DC . 20210. Do NOT send the completed application to this address. 
 
WIOA Youth 
OMB Control Number 1205-0526  ETA-9169 
Expiration Date:  06-30-2019 
Statewide Performance Report Certified in WIPS: 9/27/2018 4:11 PM EDT 
 
PROGRAM  WIOA Youth 
 TITLE (select one): 
 
STATE:  Washington Title I Local Area: 
REPORTING PERIOD COVERED (Required for current and three preceding years.) 
From ( mm/dd/yyyy  ):  7/1/2017 To ( mm/dd/yyyy  ):  6/30/2018 
 Title I Adult 
Title I Dislocated Worker 
Title I Youth 
Title I and Title III combined 
 ..
..
. 
..
 Title II Adult Education 
Title III Wagner-Peyser 
Title IV Vocational Rehabilitation 
 ..
..
..
 

SUMMARY INFORMATION 
 
 
 
Service 
 Participants Served 
Cohort Period: 
 Participants Exited 
Cohort Period: 
4/1/2017-3/31/2018 
 Funds Expended 
Cohort Period: 
7/1/2017-6/30/2018 
 Cost Per Participant Served 
Cohort Period: 
7/1/2017-6/30/2018 
 
Career Services 
 2,935 
 1,115 
 $12,052,116 
 $4,106 
 
Training Services 
 887 
 559 
 $4,491,068 
 $5,063 
 
Percent training-related employment1: 
 Percent enrolled in more than one core program: 
 Percent admin expended: 
 
19.0% 
 100.0% 
 84.7% 
 

BY PARTICIPANT CHARACTERISTICS 
 
 
 Total Participants 
Served 
Cohort Period: 
7/1/2017-6/30/2018 
 Total Participants 
Exited 
Cohort Period: 
4/1/2017-3/31/2018 
  
 Youth Employment/Education/ Training Rate 
(Q2)2 
Cohort Period: 
7/1/2016-6/30/2017 
 Youth Employment/Education/ Training Rate 
 (Q4)2 
Cohort Period: 
7/1/2016-12/31/2016 
 Median Earnings 
Cohort Period: 
7/1/2016-6/30/2017 
 Credential Rate3 
Cohort Period: 
7/1/2016-12/31/2016 
 Measurable Skill 
Gains3 
Cohort Period: 
7/1/2017-6/30/2018 
 
Num 
 Rate 
 Num 
 Rate 
 Earnings 
 Num 
 Rate 
 Num 
 Rate 
 
Total Statewide 
  
3,822 
  
1,674 
 Negotiated 
Targets 
  
 68.4% 
  
 66.9% 
 Baseline 
  
 71.5% 
  
 Baseline 
 
Actual 
 956 
 65.7% 
 402 
 64.7% 
 $3,157 
 149 
 70.3% 
 0 
  
 
      Sex 
  
Female 
 1,850 
 796 
  
 476 
 66.2% 
 199 
 63.2% 
 $3,009 
 91 
 67.9% 
 0 
  
 
 
Male 
 1,898 
 848 
  
 469 
 65.3% 
 201 
 67.0% 
 $3,277 
 57 
 74.0% 
 0 
  
 
Age 
  
< 16 
 19 
 8 
  
 6 
 66.7% 
 4 
 80.0% 
 $510 
 2 
 100.0% 
 0 
  
 
 
16 - 18 
 1,902 
 723 
  
 428 
 60.9% 
 208 
 63.2% 
 $2,422 
 63 
 60.0% 
 0 
  
 
 
19 - 24 
 1,897 
 942 
  
 522 
 70.2% 
 190 
 66.2% 
 $4,037 
 84 
 80.0% 
 0 
  
 
 
25 - 44 
 4 
 1 
  
 0 
  
 0 
  
  
 0 
  
 0 
  
 
 
45 - 54 
 0 
 0 
  
 0 
  
 0 
  
  
 0 
  
 0 
  
 
 
55 - 59 
 0 
 0 
  
 0 
  
 0 
  
  
 0 
  
 0 
  
 
 
60+ 
 0 
 0 
  
 0 
  
 0 
  
  
 0 
  
 0 
  
 
Ethnicity/Race 
  
American Indian / Alaska Native 
 272 
 120 
  
 65 
 54.2% 
 25 
 56.8% 
 $2,277 
 7 
 63.6% 
 0 
  
 
 
Asian 
 264 
 94 
  
 42 
 66.7% 
 22 
 75.9% 
 $3,188 
 9 
 75.0% 
 0 
  
 
 
Black / African American 
 569 
 252 
  
 152 
 64.4% 
 68 
 60.2% 
 $2,035 
 35 
 64.8% 
 0 
  
 
 
Hispanic / Latino 
 920 
 442 
  
 270 
 71.6% 
 97 
 72.4% 
 $3,620 
 33 
 67.3% 
 0 
  
 
 
Native Hawaiian / Pacific Islander 
 149 
 62 
  
 28 
 71.8% 
 14 
 70.0% 
 $2,096 
 4 
 80.0% 
 0 
  
 
 
White 
 2,356 
 1,034 
  
 575 
 64.1% 
 258 
 66.3% 
 $3,365 
 84 
 71.2% 
 0 
  
 
 
More Than One Race 
 308 
 129 
  
 57 
 61.3% 
 33 
 73.3% 
 $2,501 
 10 
 71.4% 
 0 
  
 

BY EMPLOYMENT BARRIER4 
 
 
 Total Participants 
Served 
 
 Total Participants 
Exited 
 
  
 Youth Employment/Education/ Training Rate (Q2)2 
 Youth Employment/Education/ Training Rate (Q4)2 
 Median Earnings 
 
 Credential Rate3 
 Measurable Skill 
Gains3 
 
Num 
 Rate 
 Num 
 Rate 
 Earnings 
 Num 
 Rate 
 Num 
 Rate 
 
Total Statewide 
  
3,822 
  
1,674 
 Negotiated 
Targets 
  
 68.4% 
  
 66.9% 
 Baseline 
  
 71.5% 
  
 Baseline 
 
Actual 
 956 
 65.7% 
 402 
 64.7% 
 $3,157 
 149 
 70.3% 
 0 
  
 
 
Displaced Homemakers 
 0 
 0 
  
 0 
  
 0 
  
  
 0 
  
 0 
  
 
English Language Learners, Low Levels of 
Literacy, Cultural Barriers 
 1,493 
 686 
  
 385 
 66.3% 
 147 
 65.9% 
 $3,277 
 60 
 75.0% 
 0 
  
 
Exhausting TANF within 2 years (Part A  
Title IV of the Social Security Act) 
 0 
 0 
  
 0 
  
 0 
  
  
 0 
  
 0 
  
 
 
Ex-offenders 
 424 
 232 
  
 85 
 59.9% 
 20 
 58.8% 
 $3,585 
 5 
 100.0% 
 0 
  
 
 
Homeless Individuals / runaway youth 
 485 
 261 
  
 120 
 59.4% 
 48 
 60.8% 
 $3,303 
 11 
 61.1% 
 0 
  
 
Long-term Unemployed  (27 or more consecutive weeks) 
 0 
 0 
  
 0 
  
 0 
  
  
 0 
  
 0 
  
 
 
Low-Income Individuals 
 1,119 
 522 
  
 220 
 62.1% 
 59 
 60.2% 
 $3,402 
 16 
 69.6% 
 0 
  
 
 
Migrant and Seasonal Farmworkers 
 32 
 19 
  
 13 
 81.3% 
 3 
 100.0% 
 $4,873 
 1 
 100.0% 
 0 
  
 
 
Individuals with Disabilities (incl. youth) 
 493 
 208 
  
 87 
 57.2% 
 37 
 56.1% 
 $2,722 
 11 
 61.1% 
 0 
  
 
Single Parents (Incl. single pregnant  women) 
 305 
 177 
  
 64 
 72.7% 
 15 
 75.0% 
 $3,993 
 5 
 83.3% 
 0 
  
 
 
Youth in foster care or aged out of system 
 139 
 65 
  
 30 
 65.2% 
 15 
 78.9% 
 $1,880 
 1 
 50.0% 
 0 
  
 

ADDITIONAL COMMENTS: 
 
The state of Washington had to remove 127 records from the Full PIRL schema, which this report is based on, due to a variety of edit-check errors that couldn’t be resolved for submission. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1Applies to Title I only. 
2This indicator also includes those who entered into a training or education program for the Youth program. 
3Credential Rate and Measurable Skill Gains do not apply to the Wagner-Peyser program. 
4Barriers to Employment are determined at the point of entry into the program. 
Numbers entered into cells in this template are the same as the corresponding "report item number" on the report specification document. Clicking on each hyperlink will take the user to the plain text language 
 
Public Burden Statement (1205-0NEW) 
Persons are not required to respond to this collection of information unless it displays a currently valid OMB control number. Respondent’s reply to these reporting requirements is mandatory (Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act, Section 116). Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 30 minutes per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate to the Office of Policy Development and Research . U.S. Department of Labor . Room N-5641 . 200 Constitution Ave., NW, . Washington, DC . 20210. Do NOT send the completed application to this address. 
 
WIOA Dislocated Worker 
OMB Control Number 1205-0526  ETA-9169 
Expiration Date:  06-30-2019 
Statewide Performance Report Certified in WIPS: 9/27/2018 4:09 PM EDT 
 
PROGRAM  WIOA Dislocated Worker 
 TITLE (select one): 
 
STATE:  Washington Title I Local Area: 
REPORTING PERIOD COVERED (Required for current and three preceding years.) 
From ( mm/dd/yyyy  ):  7/1/2017 To ( mm/dd/yyyy  ):  6/30/2018 
 Title I Adult 
Title I Dislocated Worker 
Title I Youth 
Title I and Title III combined 
 ..
. 
..
..
 Title II Adult Education 
Title III Wagner-Peyser 
Title IV Vocational Rehabilitation 
 ..
..
..
 

SUMMARY INFORMATION 
 
 
 
Service 
 Participants Served 
Cohort Period: 
 Participants Exited 
Cohort Period: 
4/1/2017-3/31/2018 
 Funds Expended 
Cohort Period: 
7/1/2017-6/30/2018 
 Cost Per Participant Served 
Cohort Period: 
7/1/2017-6/30/2018 
 
Career Services 
 2,685 
 1,691 
 $15,886,036 
 $5,917 
 
Training Services 
 2,360 
 1,012 
 $5,646,409 
 $2,393 
 
Percent training-related employment1: 
 Percent enrolled in more than one core program: 
 Percent admin expended: 
 
9.2% 
 100.0% 
 69.8% 
 

BY PARTICIPANT CHARACTERISTICS 
 
 
 Total Participants 
Served 
Cohort Period: 
7/1/2017-6/30/2018 
 Total Participants 
Exited 
Cohort Period: 
4/1/2017-3/31/2018 
  
 Employment Rate 
(Q2)2 
Cohort Period: 
7/1/2016-6/30/2017 
 Employment Rate 
(Q4)2 
Cohort Period: 
7/1/2016-12/31/2016 
 Median Earnings 
Cohort Period: 
7/1/2016-6/30/2017 
 Credential Rate3 
Cohort Period: 
7/1/2016-12/31/2016 
 Measurable Skill 
Gains3 
Cohort Period: 
7/1/2017-6/30/2018 
 
Num 
 Rate 
 Num 
 Rate 
 Earnings 
 Num 
 Rate 
 Num 
 Rate 
 
Total Statewide 
  
5,045 
  
2,703 
 Negotiated 
Targets 
  
 78.0% 
  
 73.2% 
 $8,550 
  
 60.0% 
  
 Baseline 
 
Actual 
 1,625 
 77.9% 
 657 
 78.6% 
 $9,391 
 230 
 74.4% 
 0 
       
 
      Sex 
  
Female 
 2,213 
 1,086 
  
 647 
 75.8% 
 269 
 76.9% 
 $8,202 
 77 
 73.3% 
 0 
  
 
 
Male 
 2,725 
 1,560 
  
 959 
 79.3% 
 382 
 79.7% 
 $10,579 
 151 
 75.1% 
 0 
  
 
Age 
  
< 16 
 1 
 1 
  
 0 
  
 0 
  
  
 0 
  
 0 
  
 
 
16 - 18 
 1 
 0 
  
 1 
 100.0% 
 1 
 100.0% 
 $14,725 
 1 
 100.0% 
 0 
  
 
 
19 - 24 
 220 
 126 
  
 70 
 80.5% 
 25 
 75.8% 
 $7,579 
 8 
 72.7% 
 0 
  
 
 
25 - 44 
 2,143 
 1,136 
  
 701 
 80.9% 
 260 
 83.9% 
 $10,069 
 119 
 80.4% 
 0 
  
 
 
45 - 54 
 1,373 
 729 
  
 456 
 82.0% 
 200 
 83.7% 
 $9,743 
 62 
 68.1% 
 0 
  
 
 
55 - 59 
 738 
 394 
  
 241 
 73.5% 
 101 
 71.1% 
 $8,579 
 25 
 73.5% 
 0 
  
 
 
60+ 
 569 
 317 
  
 156 
 62.9% 
 70 
 63.1% 
 $7,315 
 15 
 62.5% 
 0 
  
 
Ethnicity/Race 
  
American Indian / Alaska Native 
 130 
 66 
  
 43 
 75.4% 
 22 
 81.5% 
 $8,844 
 5 
 62.5% 
 0 
  
 
 
Asian 
 490 
 245 
  
 151 
 77.4% 
 59 
 81.9% 
 $9,625 
 16 
 66.7% 
 0 
  
 
 
Black / African American 
 282 
 161 
  
 97 
 74.0% 
 30 
 68.2% 
 $8,347 
 12 
 63.2% 
 0 
  
 
 
Hispanic / Latino 
 489 
 262 
  
 177 
 82.7% 
 67 
 84.8% 
 $9,198 
 24 
 70.6% 
 0 
  
 
 
Native Hawaiian / Pacific Islander 
 85 
 39 
  
 23 
 76.7% 
 8 
 72.7% 
 $7,854 
 4 
 80.0% 
 0 
  
 
 
White 
 3,561 
 1,943 
  
 1,184 
 77.8% 
 486 
 78.4% 
 $9,548 
 177 
 77.3% 
 0 
  
 
 
More Than One Race 
 139 
 79 
  
 50 
 75.8% 
 15 
 78.9% 
 $9,371 
 4 
 80.0% 
 0 
  
 

BY EMPLOYMENT BARRIER4 
 
 
 Total Participants 
Served 
 
 Total Participants 
Exited 
 
  
 Employment Rate 
(Q2)2 
 Employment Rate 
(Q4)2 
 Median Earnings 
 
 Credential Rate3 
 Measurable Skill 
Gains3 
 
Num 
 Rate 
 Num 
 Rate 
 Earnings 
 Num 
 Rate 
 Num 
 Rate 
 
Total Statewide 
  
5,045 
  
2,703 
 Negotiated 
Targets 
  
 78.0% 
  
 73.2% 
 $8,550 
  
 60.0% 
  
 Baseline 
 
Actual 
 1,625 
 77.9% 
 657 
 78.6% 
 $9,391 
 230 
 74.4% 
 0 
  
 
 
Displaced Homemakers 
 28 
 17 
  
 18 
 64.3% 
 9 
 60.0% 
 $6,166 
 6 
 85.7% 
 0 
  
 
English Language Learners, Low Levels of 
Literacy, Cultural Barriers 
 342 
 213 
  
 103 
 84.4% 
 23 
 82.1% 
 $8,925 
 6 
 54.5% 
 0 
  
 
Exhausting TANF within 2 years (Part A  
Title IV of the Social Security Act) 
 0 
 0 
  
 0 
  
 0 
  
  
 0 
  
 0 
  
 
 
Ex-offenders 
 178 
 124 
  
 71 
 83.5% 
 8 
 66.7% 
 $8,183 
 2 
 100.0% 
 0 
  
 
 
Homeless Individuals / runaway youth 
 99 
 59 
  
 45 
 78.9% 
 14 
 93.3% 
 $6,486 
 2 
 50.0% 
 0 
  
 
Long-term Unemployed  (27 or more consecutive weeks) 
 702 
 360 
  
 243 
 70.6% 
 122 
 79.2% 
 $8,483 
 59 
 80.8% 
 0 
  
 
 
Low-Income Individuals 
 688 
 353 
  
 178 
 76.7% 
 51 
 77.3% 
 $8,085 
 13 
 76.5% 
 0 
  
 
 
Migrant and Seasonal Farmworkers 
 31 
 19 
  
 22 
 84.6% 
 3 
 100.0% 
 $11,140 
 0 
  
 0 
  
 
 
Individuals with Disabilities (incl. youth) 
 425 
 231 
  
 89 
 65.9% 
 36 
 70.6% 
 $7,780 
 11 
 73.3% 
 0 
  
 
Single Parents (Incl. single pregnant  women) 
 211 
 116 
  
 65 
 81.3% 
 6 
 66.7% 
 $8,483 
 0 
  
 0 
  
 
 
Youth in foster care or aged out of system 
 0 
 0 
  
 0 
  
 0 
  
  
 0 
  
 0 
  
 

ADDITIONAL COMMENTS: 
 
The state of Washington had to remove 127 records from the Full PIRL schema, which this report is based on, due to a variety of edit-check errors that couldn’t be resolved for submission. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1Applies to Title I only. 
2This indicator also includes those who entered into a training or education program for the Youth program. 
3Credential Rate and Measurable Skill Gains do not apply to the Wagner-Peyser program. 
4Barriers to Employment are determined at the point of entry into the program. 
Numbers entered into cells in this template are the same as the corresponding "report item number" on the report specification document. Clicking on each hyperlink will take the user to the plain text language 
 
Public Burden Statement (1205-0NEW) 
Persons are not required to respond to this collection of information unless it displays a currently valid OMB control number. Respondent’s reply to these reporting requirements is mandatory (Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act, Section 116). Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 30 minutes per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate to the Office of Policy Development and Research . U.S. Department of Labor . Room N-5641 . 200 Constitution Ave., NW, . Washington, DC . 20210. Do NOT send the completed application to this address. 
Wagner-Peyser 
OMB Control Number 1205-0526  ETA-9169 
Expiration Date:  06-30-2019 
Statewide Performance Report Certified in WIPS: 9/27/2018 4:02 PM EDT 
 
PROGRAM  Wagner-Peyser 
 TITLE (select one): 
 
STATE:  Washington Title I Local Area: 
REPORTING PERIOD COVERED (Required for current and three preceding years.) 
From ( mm/dd/yyyy  ):  7/1/2017 To ( mm/dd/yyyy  ):  6/30/2018 
 Title I Adult 
Title I Dislocated Worker 
Title I Youth 
Title I and Title III combined 
 ..
..
..
..
 Title II Adult Education 
Title III Wagner-Peyser 
Title IV Vocational Rehabilitation 
 ..
. 
..
 

SUMMARY INFORMATION 
 
 
 
Service 
 Participants Served 
Cohort Period: 
 Participants Exited 
Cohort Period: 
4/1/2017-3/31/2018 
 Funds Expended 
Cohort Period: 
7/1/2017-6/30/2018 
 Cost Per Participant Served 
Cohort Period: 
7/1/2017-6/30/2018 
 
Career Services 
 96,663 
 90,219 
 $17,339,049 
 $179 
 
Training Services 
 6,164 
 2,693 
 $0 
 $0 
 
Percent training-related employment1: 
 Percent enrolled in more than one core program: 
 Percent admin expended: 
 
10.2% 
 31.7% 
 N/A 
 

BY PARTICIPANT CHARACTERISTICS 
 
 
 Total Participants 
Served 
Cohort Period: 
7/1/2017-6/30/2018 
 Total Participants 
Exited 
Cohort Period: 
4/1/2017-3/31/2018 
  
 Employment Rate 
(Q2)2 
Cohort Period: 
7/1/2016-6/30/2017 
 Employment Rate 
(Q4)2 
Cohort Period: 
7/1/2016-12/31/2016 
 Median Earnings 
Cohort Period: 
7/1/2016-6/30/2017 
 Credential Rate3 
Cohort Period: 
7/1/2016-12/31/2016 
 Measurable Skill 
Gains3 
Cohort Period: 
7/1/2017-6/30/2018 
 
Num 
 Rate 
 Num 
 Rate 
 Earnings 
 Num 
 Rate 
 Num 
 Rate 
 
Total Statewide 
  
102,827 
  
92,912 
 Negotiated 
Targets 
  
 68.0% 
  
 66.0% 
 $5,854 
  
  
  
  
 
Actual 
 64,664 
 70.4% 
 27,725 
 69.2% 
 $7,160 
  
  
  
  
 
Sex 
  
Female 
 46,845 
 41,800 
  
 27,578 
 68.7% 
 12,663 
 68.5% 
 $6,064 
  
  
  
  
 
 
Male 
 53,590 
 48,845 
  
 35,852 
 71.8% 
 14,670 
 69.8% 
 $8,230 
  
  
  
  
 
Age 
  
< 16 
 37 
 17 
  
 7 
 70.0% 
 4 
 80.0% 
 $736 
  
  
  
  
 
 
16 - 18 
 2,917 
 1,441 
  
 764 
 60.5% 
 413 
 63.9% 
 $2,634 
  
  
  
  
 
 
19 - 24 
 10,262 
 8,511 
  
 6,019 
 73.0% 
 2,703 
 71.7% 
 $5,055 
  
  
  
  
 
 
25 - 44 
 44,085 
 40,555 
  
 29,477 
 72.6% 
 12,787 
 72.3% 
 $7,206 
  
  
  
  
 
 
45 - 54 
 22,236 
 20,786 
  
 15,210 
 72.8% 
 6,433 
 71.8% 
 $8,261 
  
  
  
  
 
 
55 - 59 
 11,177 
 10,341 
  
 6,978 
 68.5% 
 2,968 
 67.4% 
 $7,973 
  
  
  
  
 
 
60+ 
 12,113 
 11,261 
  
 6,209 
 58.0% 
 2,417 
 52.6% 
 $6,836 
  
  
  
  
 
Ethnicity/Race 
  
American Indian / Alaska Native 
 3,440 
 2,999 
  
 1,858 
 67.0% 
 798 
 65.6% 
 $6,215 
  
  
  
  
 
 
Asian 
 8,257 
 7,424 
  
 4,887 
 68.3% 
 2,211 
 70.3% 
 $8,018 
  
  
  
  
 
 
Black / African American 
 7,856 
 6,856 
  
 4,802 
 70.2% 
 2,219 
 69.1% 
 $5,780 
  
  
  
  
 
 
Hispanic / Latino 
 16,700 
 14,754 
  
 11,421 
 82.2% 
 4,084 
 79.0% 
 $6,819 
  
  
  
  
 
 
Native Hawaiian / Pacific Islander 
 2,088 
 1,818 
  
 1,185 
 70.0% 
 500 
 68.8% 
 $6,296 
  
  
  
  
 
 
White 
 65,701 
 59,304 
  
 41,586 
 69.2% 
 18,429 
 68.2% 
 $7,272 
  
  
  
  
 
 
More Than One Race 
 3,103 
 2,615 
  
 1,755 
 68.9% 
 860 
 69.3% 
 $6,242 
  
  
  
  
 

BY EMPLOYMENT  BARRIER4 
 
 
 Total Participants 
Served 
 
 Total Participants 
Exited 
 
  
 Employment Rate 
(Q2)2 
 Employment Rate 
(Q4)2 
 Median Earnings 
 
 Credential Rate3 
 Measurable Skill 
Gains3 
 
Num 
 Rate 
 Num 
 Rate 
 Earnings 
 Num 
 Rate 
 Num 
 Rate 
 
Total Statewide 
  
102,827 
  
92,912 
 Negotiated 
Targets 
  
 68.0% 
  
 66.0% 
 $5,854 
  
  
  
  
 
Actual 
 64,664 
 70.4% 
 27,725 
 69.2% 
 $7,160 
  
  
  
  
 
 
Displaced Homemakers 
 48 
 52 
  
 43 
 70.5% 
 10 
 58.8% 
 $5,443 
  
  
  
  
 
English Language Learners, Low Levels of 
Literacy, Cultural Barriers 
 12,555 
 10,616 
  
 7,116 
 77.8% 
 2,320 
 74.1% 
 $6,794 
  
  
  
  
 
Exhausting TANF within 2 years (Part A  
Title IV of the Social Security Act) 
 0 
 0 
  
 0 
  
 0 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Ex-offenders 
 6,310 
 5,194 
  
 2,716 
 63.4% 
 1,081 
 60.7% 
 $5,169 
  
  
  
  
 
 
Homeless Individuals / runaway youth 
 4,938 
 4,061 
  
 2,117 
 59.6% 
 971 
 58.6% 
 $4,402 
  
  
  
  
 
Long-term Unemployed  (27 or more consecutive weeks) 
 702 
 360 
  
 243 
 70.6% 
 122 
 79.2% 
 $8,483 
  
  
  
  
 
 
Low-Income Individuals 
 17,090 
 14,092 
  
 7,326 
 65.1% 
 3,090 
 64.2% 
 $5,183 
  
  
  
  
 
 
Migrant and Seasonal Farmworkers 
 4,330 
 4,352 
  
 4,347 
 88.5% 
 1,230 
 83.8% 
 $7,027 
  
  
  
  
 
 
Individuals with Disabilities (incl. youth) 
 8,300 
 6,775 
  
 3,295 
 55.0% 
 1,570 
 56.1% 
 $5,549 
  
  
  
  
 
Single Parents (Incl. single pregnant  women) 
 3,423 
 2,777 
  
 1,539 
 69.2% 
 500 
 68.2% 
 $5,355 
  
  
  
  
 
 
Youth in foster care or aged out of system 
 139 
 65 
  
 31 
 66.0% 
 15 
 78.9% 
 $1,909 
  
  
  
  
 

ADDITIONAL COMMENTS: 
 
The state of Washington had to remove 127 records from the Full PIRL schema, which this report is based on, due to a variety of edit-check errors that couldn’t be resolved for submission. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1Applies to Title I only. 
2This indicator also includes those who entered into a training or education program for the Youth program. 
3Credential Rate and Measurable Skill Gains do not apply to the Wagner-Peyser  program. 
4Barriers to Employment are determined at the point of entry into the program. 
Numbers entered into cells in this template are the same as the corresponding  "report item number" on the report specification document.  Clicking on each hyperlink will take the user to the plain text language 
 
Public Burden Statement (1205-0NEW) 
Persons are not required to respond to this collection of information unless it displays a currently valid OMB control number. Respondent’s reply to these reporting requirements is mandatory (Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act, Section 116). Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 30 minutes per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate to the Office of Policy Development and Research . U.S. Department of Labor . Room N-5641 . 200 Constitution Ave., NW, . Washington, DC . 20210. Do NOT send the completed application to this address. 
 
 
 

